BOOK

ONE


Rage-Goddess, sing the rage of Peleus' son Achilles,
murderous, doomed, that cost the Achaeans countless losses,
hurling down to the House of Death so many sturdy souls.
great fighters' souls, but made their bodies carrion.
feasts for the dogs and birds.
and the will of Zeus was moving toward its end.
Begin. Muse, when the two first broke and clashed.
Agamemnon lord of men and brilliant Achilles.
What god drove them to fight with such a fury?
Apollo the son of Zeus and Leto. Incensed at the king
he swept a fatal plague through the army-men were dying
and all because Agamemnon spurned Apollo's priest.
Yes. Chryses approached the Achaeans' fast ships
to win his daughter back, bringing a priceless ransom


HOMER:

THE ILIAD

and bearing high in hand, wound on a golden staff,
the wreaths of the god, the distant deadly Archer.
He begged the whole Achaean army but most of all
the two supreme commanders, Atreus' two sons,
"Agamemnon. Menelaus-all Argives geared for war!
May the gods who hold the halls of Olympus give you
Priarn's city to plunder, then safe passage home.
Just set my daughter free, my dear one .., here,
accept these gifts, this ransom. Honor the-god
who strikes from worlds away-the son of Zeus, Apollo!"
And all ranks of Achaeans cried out their assent:
"Respect the priest, accept the shining ransom!"
But it brought no joy to the heart of Agamemnon.
The king dismissed the priest with a brutal order
ringing in his ears: "Never again, old man,
let me catch sight of you by the hollow ships!
Not loitering now, not slinking back tomorrow.
The staff and the wreaths of god will never save you then.
The girl-I won't give up the girl. Long before that,
old age will overtake her in my house, in Argas,
far from her fatherland, slaving back and forth
at the loom, forced to share my bed!
Now go,
don't tempt my wrath-and you may depart alive."
The old man was terrified. He obeyed the order,
turning, trailing away in silence down the shore
where the battle lines of breakers crash and drag.
And moving off to a safe distance, over and over
the old priest prayed to the son of sleek-haired Leto,
lord Apollo. "Hear me, Apollo! God of the silver bow
who strides the walls of Chryse and Cilia sacrosanctlord in power of Tenedos-Smintheus, god of the plague!
If I ever roofed a shrine to please your heart,
ever burned the long rich bones of bulls and goats
on your holy altar, now, now bring my prayer to pass.
Pay the Danaans back-your arrows for my tears!"

[14-42J

20

30

40



79

His prayer went lip and Phoebus Apollo heard him.
Down he strode from Olympus' peaks, storming at heart
with his bow and hooded quiver slung across his shoulders.
The arrows clanged at his back as the god quaked with rage.
the god himself on the march and down he came like night.
Over against the ships he dropped to a knee, let fly a shaft
and a terrifying clash rang out from the great silver bow.
First he went for the mules and circling dogs but then,
launching a piercing shaft at the men themselves.
he cut them down in drovesand the corpse-fires burned on, night and day, no end in sight.

50

i43-73j

BOOK I.

Nine days the arrows of god swept through the army.
On the tenth Achilles called all ranks to musterthe impulse seized him, sent by white-armed Hera
grieving to see Achaean fighters drop and die.
Once they'd gathered, crowding the meeting grounds,
the swift runner Achilles rose and spoke among them:
"Son of Atreus, now we are beaten back. I fear,
the long campaign is lost. So home we sail ...
if we can escape our death-if war and plague
are joining forces now to crush the Argives.
But wait: let us question a holy man,
a prophet, even a man skilled with dreamsdreams as well can come our way from Zeuscome, someone to tell us why Apollo rages so,
whether he blames us for a vow we failed, or sacrifice.
If only the god would share the smoky savor of lambs
and full-grown goats, Apollo might be willing, still,
somehow, to save us from this plague."
So he proposed
and down he sat again as Calchas rose among them,
Thestor's son, the clearest by far of all the seers
who scan the flight of birds. He knew all things that are,
all things that are past and all that are to come,
the seer who had led the Argive ships to Troy
with the second sight that god Apollo gave him.
For the armies' good the seer began to speak:

60

70

80

80

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

!74-102j

"Achilles, dear to Zeus ...
you order me to explain Apollo's anger,
the distant deadly Archer? I will tell it all.
But strike a pact with me, swear you will defend me
with all your heart, with words and strength of hand.
For there is a man I will enrage-I see it nowa powerful man who lords it over all the Argives,
one the Achaeans must obey ... A mighty king,
raging against an inferior, is too strong.
Even if he can swallow down his wrath today,
still he will nurse the burning in his chest
until, sooner or later, he sends it bursting fonh.
Consider it closely, Achilles. Will you save me?"
And the matchless runner reassured him: "Courage!
Out with itnow. Calchas. Reveal the will of god,
whatever you may know. And I swear by Apollo
dear to Zeus, the power you pray to, Calchas,
when you reveal god's will to the Argives-no one,
not while I am alive and see the light on earth, no one
will lay his heavy hands on you by the hollow ships.
None among all the armies. Not even if you mean
Agamemnon here who now claims to be, by far,
the best of the Achaeans."
The seer took heart
and this time he spoke out, bravely: "Bewarehe casts no blame for a vow we failed, a sacrifice.
The god's enraged because Agamemnon spurned his priest,
he refused to free his daughter, he refused the ransom.
That's why the Archer sends us pains and he will send us more
and never drive this shameful destruction from the Argives,
not till we give back the girl with sparkling eyes
to her loving father-no price, no ransom paidand carry a sacred hundred bulls to Chryse town.
Then we can calm the god, and only then appease him."
So he declared and sat down. But among them rose
the fighting son of Atreus, lord of the far-flung kingdoms,

90

100

110

120

{/02- HI

BOOK I:



Agamemnon-furious, his dark heart filled to the brim,
blazing with anger now, his eyes like searing fire.
With a sudden, killing look he wheeled on Cakhas first:
"Seer of misery! Never a word that works to my advantage!
Always misery warms your heart, your propheciesnever a word of profit said or brought to pass.
Now, again, you divine god's will for the armies,
bruit it about, as fact, why the deadly Archer
multiplies our pains: because I. I refused
that glittering price for the young girl Chryseis.
Indeed, I prefer her by far, the girl herself.
I want her mine in my own house! I rank her higher
than Clyternnestra, my wedded wife-she's nothing less
in build or breeding, in mind or works of hand.
But I am willing to give her back, even so,
if that is best for all. What I really want
is to keep my people safe, not see them dying.
But fetch me another prize, and straight off too,
else I alone of the Argives go without my honor.
That would be a disgrace. You are all witness,
look-my prize is snatched away!"
But the swift runner
Achilles answered him at once, "Just how, Agamemnon,
great field marshal .., most grasping man alive,
how can the generous Argives give you prizes now?
I know of no troves of treasure, piled, lying idle,
anywhere. Whatever we dragged from towns we plundered,
all's been portioned out. But collect it, call it back
from the rank and file? That would be the disgrace.
So return the girl to the god, at least for now.
We Achaeans will pay you back, three, four times over,
if Zeus will grant us the gift, somehow, someday,
to raze Trov's massive ramparts to the ground."
But King Agamemnon countered, "Not so quickly,
brave as you are, godlike Achilles-trying to cheat me.
Oh no, you won't get past me, take me in that way!
What do you want? To cling to your own prize

81

130

140

150

82

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

{I H-62/

while I sit calmly by-empty-handed here?
Is that why you order me to give her back?
No-if our generous Argives will give me a prize,
a match for my desires, equal to what I've lost.
well and good. But if they give me nothing
I will take a prize myself-your own, or Ajax'
or Odysseus' prize-I'll commandeer her myself
and let that man I go to visit choke with rage!
Enough. We'll deal with all this later, in due time.
Now come, we haul a black ship down to the bright sea,
gather a decent number of oarsmen along her locks
and put aboard a sacrifice, and Chryseis herself,
in all her beauty .., we embark her too.
Let one of the leading captains take command.
Ajax, ldomeneus, trusty Odysseus or you, Achilles,
you-the most violent man alive--so you can perform
the rites for us and calm the god yourself."
A dark glance
and the headstrong runner answered him in kind: "Shameless-armored in shamelessness--always shrewd with greed!
How could any Argive soldier obey your orders,
freely and gladly do your sailing for you
or fight your enemies, full force? Not I, no.
It wasn't Trojan spearmen who brought me here to fight.
The Trojans never did me damage, not in the least,
they never stole my cattle or my horses, never
in Phthia where the rich soil breeds strong men
did they lay waste my crops. How could they?
Look at the endless miles that lie between us ...
shadowy mountain ranges, seas that surge and thunder.
No, you colossal, shameless-we all followed you,
to please you, to fight for you, to win your honor
back from the Trojans--Menelaus and you, you dog-face!
What do you care? Nothing. You don't look right or left.
And now you threaten to strip me f?f my prize in personthe one I fought for long and hard, and sons of Achaea
handed her to me.

160

170

180

190

/163-9°1

BOOK I:



My honors never equal yours,
whenever we sack some wealthy Trojan strongholdmy arms bear the brunt of the raw, savage fighting,
true, but when it comes to dividing up the plunder
the lion's share is yours, and back I go to my ships,
clutching some scrap, some pittance that I love,
when I have fought to exhaustion.
No more nowback I go to Phthia. Better that way by far,
to journey home in the beaked ships of war.
I have no mind to linger here disgraced,
brimming your cup and piling up your plunder."

83

200

But the lord of men Agamemnon shot back,
"Desert, by all means-if the spirit drives you home!
I will never beg you to stay, not on my account.

Never-others will take my side and do me honor,
Zeus above all, whose wisdom rules the world.
You-I hate you most of all the warlords
loved by the gods. Always dear to your heart,
strife, yes, and battles, the bloody grind of war.
What if you are a great soldier? That's just a gift of god.
Go home with your ships and comrades, lord it over
your Myrmidons!
You are nothing to me-you and your overweening anger!
But let this be my warning on your way:
since Apollo insists on taking my Chryseis,
I'll send her back in my own ships with my crew.
But I. I will be there in person at your tents
to take Briseis in all her beauty, your own prize- ,
so you can learn just how much greater I am than you
and the next man up may shrink from matching words with me,
from hoping to rival Agamemnon strength for strength!"
He broke off and anguish gripped Achilles.
The heart in his rugged chest was pounding, tom '...
Should he draw the long sharp sword slung at his hip,

210

220

84

HOMER

THE ILIAD

thrust through the ranks and kill Agamemnon now?or check his rage and beat his fury down?
As his racing spirit veered back and forth,
just as he drew his huge blade from its sheath,
down from the vaulting heavens swept Athena,
the white-armed goddess Hera sped her down:
Hera loved both men and cared for both alike.
Rearing behind him Pallas seized his fiery haironly Achilles saw her, none of the other fightersstruck with wonder he spun around, he knew her at once,
Pallas Athena! the terrible blazing of those eyes,
and his winged words went flying: "Why, why now?
Child of Zeus with the shield of thunder, why come now?
To witness the outrage Agamemnon just committed?
1 tell you this, and so help me it's the truthhe'll soon pay for his arrogance with his life!"
Her gray eyes clear, the goddess Athena answered,
"Down from the skies 1 come to check your rage
if only you will yield.
The white-armed goddess Hera sped me down:
she loves you both, she cares for you both alike.
Stop this fighting, now. Don't lay hand to sword.
Lash him with threats of the price that he will face.
And 1 tell you this-and 1 know it is the truthone day glittering gifts will lie before you,
three times over to pay for all his outrage.
Hold back now. Obey us both."
So she urged
and the swift runner complied at once: "I mustwhen the two of you hand down commands, Goddess,
a man submits though his heart breaks with fury.
Better for him by far. If a man obeys the gods
they're quick to hear his prayers."
And with that
Achilles stayed his burly hand on the silver hilt
and slid the huge blade back in its sheath.
He would not fight the orders of Athena.

{191-221{

230

240

250

/221-52]

BOOK I:



Soaring home to Olympus, she rejoined the gods
aloft in the halls of Zeus whose shield is thunder.

85
260

But Achilles rounded on Agamemnon once again,
lashing out at him, not relaxing his anger for a moment:
"Staggering drunk, with your dog's eyes, your fawn's heart!
Never once did you arm with the troops and go to battle
or risk an ambush packed with Achaea's picked menyou lack the courage, you can see death coming.
Safer by far, you find, to foray all through camp,
commandeering the prize of any man who speaks against you.
King who devours his people! Wonhless husks, the men you rule- 270
if not, Atrides, this outrage would have been your last.
I tell you this, and I swear a mighty oath upon it ...
by this, this scepter, look,
that never again will put forth crown and branches,
now it's left its stump on the mountain ridge forever,
nor will it sprout new green again, now the brazen ax
has stripped its bark and leaves, and now the sons of Achaea
pass it back and forth as they hand their judgments down,
upholding the honored customs whenever Zeus commandsThis scepter will be the mighty force behind my oath:
280
someday, I swear, a yearning for AchiIles wiII strike
Achaea's sons and all your armies! But then, Atrides,
harrowed as you will be, nothing you do can save younot when your hordes of fighters drop and die,
cut down by the hands of man-killing Hector! Thenthen you will tear your heart out, desperate, raging
that you disgraced the best of the Achaeansl"
Down on the ground
he dashed the scepter studded bright with golden nails,
then took his seat again. The son of Atreus smoldered,
glaring across at him, but Nestor rose between them,
290
the man of winning words, the dear speaker of Pylos ...
Sweeter than honey from his tongue the voice flowed on and on.
Two generations of mortal men he had seen go down by now,
those who were born and bred with him in the old days,
in Pylos' holy realm, and now he ruled the third.

86

HOMER·

THE ILIAD

He pleaded with both kings, with clear good will,
"No more-or enormous sorrow comes to all Achaea!
How they would exult. Priam and Prism's sons
and all the Trojans. Oh they'd leap for joy
10 hear the twp of you battling on this way,
you who excel us all, tirst in Achaean councils,
tirst in the ways of war.
Stop. Please.
Listen to Nestor. You are both younger than I,
and in my time I struck up with better men than you,
even you, but never once did they make light of me.
I've never seen such men, I never will again ...
men like Pirithous, Dryas, that tine captain,
Caeneus and Exadius, and Polyphemus, royal prince,
and Theseus. Aegeus' boy, a match for the immortals.
They were the strongest mortals ever bred on earth,
the strongest, and they fought against the strongest too,
shaggy Centaurs, wild brutes of the mountainsthey hacked them down, terrible, deadly work.
And I was in their ranks, fresh out of Pylas,
far away from home-they enlisted me themselves
and I fought on my own, a free lance, single-handed.
And none of the men who walk the earth these days
could battle with those fighters, none, but they,
they took to heart my counsels, marked my words.
So now you listen too. Yielding is far better. . .
Don't seize the girl, Agamemnon, powerful as you areleave her, just as the sons of Achaea gave her,
his prize from the very first.
And you, Achilles, never hope to fight it out
with your king, pitting force against his force:
no one can match the honors dealt a king, you know,
a sceptered king to whom great Zeus gives glory.
Strong as you are-a goddess was your motherhe has more power because he rules more men.
Atrides, end your anger-look, it's Nestorl
I beg you, cool your fury against Achilles.

/253-831

300

310

320

330

[283-311J

BOOK I:



87

Here the man stands over all Achaea's armies,
our rugged bulwark braced for shocks of war."
But King Agamemnon answered him in haste,
"True, old man-all you say is fit and properbut this soldier wants to tower over the armies,
he wants to rule over all, to lord it over all,
give out orders to every man in sight. Well,
there's one, I trust, who will never yield to him!
What if the everlasting gods have made a spearman of him?
Have they entitled him to hurl abuse at me?"
"Yes!"-blazing Achilles broke in quickly"What a worthless, burnt-out coward I'd be called
if I would submit to you and all your orders,
whatever you blurt out. Fling them at others,
don't give me commands!
Never again, I trust, will Achilles yield to you.
And I tell you this-take it to heart, I warn youmy hands will never do battle for that girl.
neither with you, King, nor any man alive.
You Achaeans gave her, now you've snatched her back.
But all the rest I possess beside my fast black shipnot one bit of it can you seize against my will, Atrides.
Come, try it! So the men can see, that instant,
your black blood gush and spurt around my spear!"
Once the two had fought it out with words,
battling face-to-face, both sprang to their feet
and broke up the muster beside the Argive squadrons.
Achilles strode off to his trim ships and shelters,
back to his friend Patroclus and their comrades.
Agamemnon had a vessel hauled down to the sea,
he picked out twenty oarsmen to man her locks,
put aboard the cattle for sacrifice to the god
and led Chryseis in all her beauty amidships.

340

350

360

88

HOMER.

THE ILIAD

/JIJ-J8/

Versatile Odysseus took the helm as captain.
All embarked.
the party launched out on the sea's foaming lanes
while the son of Atreus told his troops to wash,
to purify themselves from the filth of plague.
They scoured it off, threw scourings in the surf
and sacrificed to Apollo full-grown bulls and goats
along the beaten shore of the fallow barren sea
and savory smoke went swirling up the skies.
So the men were engaged throughout the camp.
But King Agamemnon would not stop the quarrel.
the first threat he hurled against Achilles.
He called Talthybius and Eurybates briskly.
his two heralds, ready, willing aides:
"Go to Achilles' lodge. Take Briseis at once.
his beauty Briseis by the hand and bring her here.
But if he will not surrender her, I'll go myself,
I'll seize her myself, with an army at my backand all the worse for him!"
He sent them off
with the strict order ringing in their ears.
Against their will the two men made their way
along the breaking surf of the barren salt sea
and reached the Myrmidon shelters and their ships.
They found him beside his lodge and black hull,
seated grimly-and Achilles took no joy
when he saw the two approaching.
They were afraid, they held the king in awe
and stood there, silent. Not a word to Achilles.
not a question. But he sensed it all in his heart,
their fear, their charge, and broke the silence for them:
"Welcome, couriers! Good heralds of Zeus and men.
here, come closer. You have done nothing to me.
You are not to blame. No one but Agamemnon he is the one who sent you for Briseis.
Go, Patroclus, Prince, bring out the girl
and hand her to them so they can take her back.

370

380

390

{338-67{

BOOK I:



But let them both bear witness to my loss. . .
in the face of blissful gods and mortal men,
in the face of that unbending, ruthless kingif the day should come when the armies need me
to save their ranks from ignominious, stark defeat.
The man is raving-with all the murderous fury in his heart.
He lacks the sense to see a day behind, a day ahead,
and safeguard the Achaeans battling by the ships."
Patroclus obeyed his great friend's command.
He led Briseis in all her beauty from the lodge
and handed her over to the men to take away.
And the two walked back along the Argive ships
while she trailed on behind, reluctant, every step.
But Achilles wept, and slipping away from his companions,
far apart, sat down on the beach of the heaving gray sea
and scanned the endless ocean. Reaching out his arms,
again and again he prayed to his dear mother: "Mother!
You gave me life, short as that life will be,
so at least Olympian Zeus, thundering up on high,
should give me honor-but now he gives me nothing.
Atreus' son Agamemnon, for all his far-flung kingdomsthe man disgraces me, seizes and keeps my prize,
he tears her away himself!"
So he wept and prayed
and his noble mother heard him, seated near her father,
the Old Man of the Sea in the salt green depths.
Suddenly up she rose from the churning surf
like mist and settling down beside him as he wept,
stroked Achilles gently, whispering his name, "My childwhy in tears? What sorrow has touched your heart?
Tell me, please. Don't harbor it deep inside you.
We must share it all."
And now from his depths'
the proud runner groaned: "You know, you know,
why labor through it all? You know it all so well ...
We raided Thebe once, Eetion's sacred citadel,
we ravaged the place, hauled all the plunder here

89
400

410

420

410

90

HOMER-

TH~

ILIAD

and the armies passed it round, share and share alike.
and they chose the beauty Chryseis for Agamemnon.
But soon her father, the holy priest of Apollo
the distant deadly Archer, Chryses approached
the fast trim ships of the Argives armed in bronze
to win his daughter back, bringing a priceless ransom
and bearing high in hand, wound on a golden staff.
the wreaths of the god who strikes from worlds away.
He begged the whole Achaean army but most of all
the two supreme commanders, Atreus' two sons,
and all ranks of Achaeans cried out their assent.
'Respect the priest, accept the shining ransom!'
But it brought no joy to the heart of Agamemnon,
our high and mighty king dismissed the priest
with a brutal order ringing in his ears.
And shattered with anger, the old man withdrew
but Apollo heard his prayer-he loved him, deeplyhe loosed his shaft at the Argives, withering plague.
and now the troops began to drop and die in droves.
the arrows 'of god went showering left and right,
whipping through the Achaeans' vast encampment.
But the old seer who knew the cause full well
revealed the will of the archer god Apollo.
And I was the first, mother. I urged them all,
'Appease the god at once!' That's when the fury
gripped the son of Atreus. Agamemnon leapt to his feet
and hurled his threat-his threat's been driven home.
One girl. Chryseis, the fiery-eyed Achaeans
ferry out in a fast trim ship to Chryse Island.
laden with presents for the god. The other girl,
just now/ the heralds came and led her away from camp.
Briseus' daughter, the prize the armies gave me.
But you, mother, if you have any power at all,
protect your son! Go to Olympus, plead with Zeus,
if you ever warmed his heart with a word or any action ...
Time and again I heard your claims in father's halls,
boasting how you and you alone of all the immortals

[368-98/

440

450

460

470

[397-4241

BOOK 1:



rescued Zeus, the lord of the dark storm cloud,
from ignominious, stark defeat ...
That day the Olympians tried to chain him down,
Hera, Poseidon lord of the sea, and Pallas Athenayou rushed to Zeus, dear Goddess, broke those chains,
quickly ordered the hundred-hander to steep Olympus,
that monster whom the immortals call Briareus
but every mortal calls the Sea-gad's son, Aegaeon.
though he's stronger than his father. Down he sat,
flanking Cronus' son, gargantuan in the glory of it all,
and the blessed gods were struck with terror then,
they stopped shackling Zeus.
Remind him of that,
now, go and sit beside him, grasp his knees ...
persuade him, somehow, to help the Trojan cause,
to pin the Achaeans back against their ships,
trap them round the bay and mow them down.
So all can reap the benefits of their kingso even mighty Atrides can see how mad he was
to disgrace Achilles, the best of the Achaeans!"
And Thetis answered, bursting into tears,
"0 my son, my sorrow, why did I ever bear you?
All I bore was doom ...
Would to god you could linger by your ships
without a grief in the world, without a torment!
Doomed to a short life, you have so little time.
And not only short, now, but filled with heartbreak too,
more than all other men alive-doomed twice over.
Ah to a cruel fate I bore you in our halls!
Still, I shall go to Olympus crowned with snow
and repeat your prayer to Zeus who loves the lightning.
Perhaps he will be persuaded.
But you, my child,
stay here by the fast ships, rage on at the Achaeans.
just keep clear of every foray in the fighting.
Only yesterday Zeus went off to the Ocean River
to feast with the Aethiopians, loyal, lordly men,

91

480

490

500

92

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

and all the gods went with him. But in twelve days
the Father returns to Olympus. Then, for your sake,
up I go to the bronze floor, the royal house of ZeusI'll grasp his knees, I think I'll win him over."
With that vow
his mother went away and left him there, alone,
his heart inflamed for the sashed and lovely girl
they'd wrenched away from him against his will.
Meanwhile Odysseus drew in close to Chryse Island,
bearing the splendid sacrifice in the vessel's hold.
And once they had entered the harbor deep in bays
they furled and stowed the sail in the black ship,
they lowered the mast by the forestays, smoothly,
quickly let it down on the forked mast-crutch
and rowed her into a mooring under oars.
Out went the bow-stones-cables fast asternand the crew themselves swung out in the breaking surf,
leading out the sacrifice for the archer god Apollo,
and out of the deep-sea ship Chryseis stepped too.
Then tactful Odysseus led her up to the altar,
placing her in her loving father's arms, and said,
"Chryses, the lord of men Agamemnon sent me here
to bring your daughter back and perform a sacrifice,
a grand sacrifice to Apollo-for all Achaea's sakeso we can appease the god
who's loosed such grief and torment on the Argives."
With those words he left her in Chryses' arms
and the priest embraced the child he loved, exultant.
At once the men arranged the sacrifice for Apollo,
making the cattle ring his well-built altar,
then they rinsed their hands and took up barley.
Rising among them Chryses stretched his arms to the sky
and prayed in a high resounding voice, "Hear me, Apollo!
God of the silver bow who strides the walls of Chryse
and Cilia sacrosanct-lord in power of Tenedos!
If you honored me last time and heard my prayer
and rained destruction down on all Achaea's ranks,

[424-54)

510

520

530

540

[455-85J

BOOK 1:



93

now bring my prayer to pass once more. Now, at last,
drive this killing plague from the armies of Achaeal"
His prayer went up and Phoebus Apollo heard him.
And soon as the men had prayed and flung the barley,
first they lifted back the heads of the victims,
slit their throats, skinned them and carved away
the meat from the thighbones and wrapped them in fat,
a double fold sliced clean and topped with strips of flesh.
And the old man burned these over dried split wood
and over the quarters poured out glistening wine
while young men at his side held five-pronged forks.
Once they had burned the bones and tasted the organs
they cut the rest into pieces, pierced them with spits,
roasted them to a turn and pulled them off the fire.
The work done, the feast laid out, they ate well
and no man's hunger lacked a share of the banquet.
When they had put aside desire for food and drink,
the young men brimmed the mixing bowls with wine
and tipping first drops for the god in every cup
they poured full rounds for all. And all day long
they appeased the god with song, raising a ringing hymn
to the distant archer god who drives away the plague,
those young Achaean warriors singing out his power,
and Apollo listened, his great heart warm with joy.
Then when the sun went down and night came on
they made their beds and slept by the stern-cables ...
When young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more,
they set sail for the main encampment of Achaea.
The Archer sent them a bracing following wind,
they stepped the mast, spread white sails wide,
the wind hit full and the canvas bellied out
and a dark blue wave, foaming up at the bow,
sang out loud and strong as the ship made way,
skimming the whitecaps, cutting toward her goal.
And once offshore of Achaea's vast encampment
they eased her in and hauled the black ship high,

550

560

570

94

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

far up on the sand, and shored her up with timbers.
Then they scattered, each to his own ship and shelter.

[486-514J

580

But he raged on, grimly camped by his fast fleet,
the royal son of Peleus, the swift runner Achilles.
Now he no longer haunted the meeting grounds
where men win glory, now he no longer went to war
but day after day he ground his heart out, waiting there,
yearning, always yearning for battle cries and combat.
But now as the twelfth dawn after this shone clear
the gods who live forever marched home to Olympus,
all in a long cortege, and Zeus led them on.
And Thetis did not forget her son's appeals.
She broke from a cresting wave at first light
and soaring up to the broad sky and Mount Olympus,
found the son of Cronus gazing down on the world,
peaks apart from the other gods and seated high
on the topmost crown of rugged ridged Olympus.
And crouching down at his feet,
quickly grasping his knees with her left hand,
her right hand holding him underneath the chin,
she prayed to the lord god Zeus, the son of Cronus:
"Zeus. Father Zeus! If I ever served you well
among the deathless gods with a word or action,
bring this prayer to pass: honor my son Achilles!doomed to the shortest life of any man on earth.
And now the lord of men Agamemnon has disgraced him,
seizes and keeps his prize, tears her away himself. But youexalt him, Olympian Zeus: your urgings rule the world!
Come, grant the Trojans victory after victory
till the Achaean armies pay my dear son back,
building higher the honor he deserves!"
She paused
but Zeus who commands the storm clouds answered nothing.
The Father sat there, silent. It seemed an eternity ...
But Thetis, clasping his knees, held on, clinging,
pressing her question once again: "Grant my prayer,

590

600

610

[514-40]

BOOK I:



95

once and for all, Father, bow your head in assent!
Or deny me outright. What have you to fear?
So I may know, too well, just how cruelly
I am the most dishonored goddess of them all."
Filled with anger
Zeus who marshals the storm clouds answered her at last:
"Disaster. You will drive me into war with Hera.
620
She will provoke me, she with her shrill abuse.
Even now in the face of all the immortal gods
she harries me perpetually, Hera charges me
that I always go to battle for the Trojans.
Away with you now. Hera might catch us here.
I will see to this. I will bring it all to pass.
Look, I will bow my head if that will satisfy you.
That, I remind you, that among the immortal gods
is the strongest, truest sign that I can give.
No word or work of mine-nothing can be revoked,
there is no treachery, nothing left unfinished
630
once I bow my head to say it shall be done."
So he decreed. And Zeus the son of Cronus bowed
his craggy dark brows and the deathless locks came pouring
down from the thunderhead of the great immortal king
and giant shock waves spread through all Olympus.
So the two of them made their pact and parted.
Deep in the sea she dove from radiant Mount Olympus.
Zeus went back to his own halls, and all the gods
in full assembly rose from their seats at once
to meet the Father striding toward them now.
None dared remain at rest as Zeus advanced,
they all sprang up to greet him face-to-face
as he took his place before them on his throne.
But Hera knew it all. She had seen how Thetis,
the Old Man of the Sea's daughter. Thetis quick
on her glistening feet was hatching plans with Zeus.
And suddenly Hera taunted the Father, son of Cronus:
"So, who of the gods this time, my treacherous one,

640

96

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

1540-66/

was hatching plans' with you?
Always your pleasure, whenever my back is turned,
to settle things in your grand clandestine way.
You never deign, do you, freely and frankly,
to share your plots with me-never, not a word!"
The father of men and gods replied sharply,
"Hera-stop hoping to fathom all my thoughts.
You wiII find them a trial, though you are my wife.
Whatever is right for you to hear, no one, trust me,
wiII know of it before you, neither god nor man.
Whatever I choose to plan apart from all the godsno more of your everlasting questions, probe and pry no more."
And Hera the Queen, her dark eyes wide, exclaimed,
"Dread majesty, son of Cronus, what are you saying?
Now surely I've never probed or pried in the past.
Why, you can scheme to yout heart's content
without a qualm in the world for me. But now
I have a terrible fear that she has won you over,
Thetis, the Old Man of the Sea's daughter, Thetis
with her glistening feet. I know it. Just at dawn
she knelt down beside you and grasped your knees
and I suspect you bowed your head in assent to heryou granted once and for all to exalt Achilles now
and slaughter hordes of Achaeans pinned against their ships."
And Zeus who marshals the thunderheads returned,
"Maddening one .., you and your eternal suspicionsI can never escape you. Ah but tell me, Hera,
just what can you do about all this? Nothing.
Only estrange yourself from me a little moreand all the worse for you.
If what you say is true, that must be my pleasure.
Now go sit down. Be quiet now. Obey my orders,
for fear the gods, however many Olympus holds,

650

660

670

680

/566-94/

BOOK I:



97

are powerless to protect you when I come
to throttle you with my irresistible hands."
He subsided
but Hera the Queen, her eyes wider, was terrified.
She sat in silence. She wrenched her will to his.
And throughout the halls of Zeus the gods of heaven
quaked with fear. Hephaestus the Master Craftsman
rose up first to harangue them all, trying now
to bring his loving mother a little comfort,
the white-armed goddess Hera: "Oh disaster. . .
that's what it is, and it will be unbearable
if the two of you must come to blows this way,
flinging the gods in chaos just for mortal men.
No more joy for us in the sumptuous feast
when riot rules the day.
I urge you, mother-you know that I am rightwork back into his good graces, so the Father,
our beloved Father will never wheel on us again,
send our banquets crashing! The Olympian lord of lightningwhat if he would like to blast us from our seats?
He is far too strong. Go back to him, mother,
stroke the Father with soft, winning wordsat once the Olympian will turn kind to us again."
Pleading, springing up with a two-handled cup,
he reached it toward his loving mother's hands
with his own winning words: "Patience, mother!
Grieved as you are, bear up, or dear as you are,
I have to see you beaten right before my eyes.
I would be shattered-what could I do to save you?
It's hard to fight the Olympian strength for strength.
You remember the last time I rushed to your defense?
He seized my foot, he hurled me off the tremendous threshold
and all day long I dropped, I was dead weight and then,
when the sun went down, down I plunged on Lemnos,
little breath left in me. But the mortals there
soon nursed a fallen immortal back to life."

690

700

710

98

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

{595-6111

At that the white-armed goddess Hera smiled
and smiling, took the cup from her child's hands.
Then dipping sweet nectar up from the mixing bowl
he poured it round to all the immortals, left to right.
And uncontrollable laughter broke from the happy gods
as they watched the god of fire breathing hard
and bustling through the halls.
That hour then
and all day long till the sun went down they feasted
and no god's hunger lacked a share of the handsome banquet
or the gorgeous lyre Apollo struck or the Muses singing
voice to voice in choirs, their vibrant music rising.
At last, when the sun's fiery light had set,
each immortal went to rest in his own house,
the splendid high halls Hephaestus built for each
with all his craft and cunning, the famous crippled Smith.
And Olympian Zeus the lord of lightning went to his own bed
where he had always lain when welcome sleep came on him.
There he climbed and there he slept and by his side
lay Hera the Queen, the goddess of the golden throne.

720

730

BOOK TWO


Now the great array of gods and chariot-driving men
slept all night long, but the peaceful grip of sleep
could not hold Zeus, turning it over in his mind ...
how to exalt Achilles?-how to slaughter
hordes of Achaeans pinned against their ships?
As his spirit churned, at last one plan seemed best:
he would send a murderous dream to Agamemnon.
Calling out to the vision, Zeus winged it on:
"Go, murderous Dream, to the fast Achaean ships
and once you reach Agamemnon's shelter rouse him,
order him, word-for-word, exactly as I command.
Tell Atrides to arm his long-haired Achaeans,
to attack at once, full forcenow he can take the broad streets of Troy.
The immortal gods who hold Olympus clash no more,

10

99

100

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

/14-4J/

Hera's appeals have brought them round and all agree:
griefs are about to crush the men of Troy."
At that command
the dream went winging off, and passing quickly
along the fast trim ships, made for the king
and found him soon, sound asleep in his tent
with refreshing godsent slumber drifted round him.
Hovering at his head the vision rose like Nestor,
Neleus' son, the chief Agamemnon honored most.
Inspired with Nestor's voice and sent by Zeus,
the dream cried out, "Still asleep, Agamemnon?
The son of Atreus, that skilled breaker of horses?
How can you sleep all night, a man weighed down with duties?
Your armies turning over their lives to your commandresponsibilities so heavy. Listen to me, quicklyl
I bring you a message sent by Zeus, a world away
but he has you in his heart, he pities you now ...
Zeus commands you to arm your long-hatred Achaeans,
to attack at once, full force-now you can take the broad streets of Troy!
The immortal gods who hold Olympus clash no more,
Hera's appeals have brought them round and all agree:
griefs from Zeus are about to crush the men of Troy!
But keep this message firmly in your mind.
Remember-let no loss of memory overcome you
when the sweet grip of slumber sets you free."
With that the dream departed, leaving him there,
his heart racing with hopes that would not come to pass.
He thought he would take the city of Priam then,
that very day, the fool. How could he know
what work the Father had in mind? The Father,
still bent on plaguing the Argives and Trojans both
with wounds and groans in the bloody press of battle.
But rousing himself from sleep, the divine voice
swirling round him, Atrides sat up, bolt awake,
pulled on a soft tunic, linen never worn,
and over it threw his flaring battle-cape,

20

30

40

50

/44-72/

BOOK 2:



101

under his smooth feet he fastened supple sandals,
across his shoulder slung his silver-studded sword.
Then he seized the royal scepter of his fathers-its power can never die-and grasping it tightly
off he strode to the ships of Argives armed in bronze.
Now the goddess Dawn climbed up to Olympus heights,
declaring the light of day to Zeus and the deathless gods
as the king commanded heralds to cry out loud and _dear
and muster the long-hatred Achaeans to full assembly.
Their cries rang out. Battalions gathered quickly.
But first he called his ranking chiefs to council
beside the ship of Nestor, the warlord born in Pylos.
Summoning them together there Atrides set forth
his cunning, foolproof plan: "Hear me, friendsa dream sent by the gods has come to me in sleep.
Down through the bracing godsent night it came
like good Nestor in features, height and build,
the old king himself, and hovering at my head
the dream called me on: 'Still asleep, Agamemnon?
The son of Atreus, that skilled breaker of horses?
How can you sleep all night, a man weighed down with duties?
Your armies turning over their lives to your commandresponsibilities so heavy. Listen to me, quickly!
I bring you a message sent by Zeus, a world away
but he has you in his heart, he pities you now ...
Zeus commands you to arm your long-hatred Achaeans,
to attack at once, full forcenow you can take the broad streets of Troy!
The immortal gods who hold Olympus clash no more,
Hera's appeals have brought them round and all agree:
griefs from Zeus are about to crush the men of Troy!
But keep this message firmly in your mind.'
With that
the dream went winging off and soothing sleep released me.
Come-see if we can arm the Achaeans for assault.

60

70

80

102

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

But first, according to time-honored custom,
I will test the men with a challenge, tell them all
to crowd the oarlocks, cut and run in their ships.
But you take up your battle-stations at every point.
command them, hold them back."
So much for his plan.
Agamemnon took his seat and Nestor rose among them.
Noble Nestor the king of Pylas' sandy harbor
spoke and urged them on with all good will:
"Friends, lords of the Argives, 0 my captains!
If any other Achaean had told us of this dream
we'd call it false and turn our backs upon it.
But look, the man who saw it has every claim
to be the best, the bravest Achaean we can field.
Come-see if we can arm the Achaeans for assault."
And out he marched, leading the way from council.
The rest sprang to their feet, the sceptered kings
obeyed the great field marshal. Rank and file
streamed behind and rushed like swarms of bees
pouring out of a rocky hollow, burst on endless burst,
bunched in clusters seething over the first spring blooms,
dark hordes swirling into the air, this way, that wayso the many armed platoons from the ships and tents
came marching on, close-file, along the deep wide beach
to crowd the meeting grounds, and Rurnor. Zeus's crier,
like wildfire blazing among them, whipped them on.
The troops assembled. The meeting grounds shook.
The earth groaned and rumbled under the huge weight
as soldiers took positions-the whole place in uproar.
Nine heralds shouted out, trying to keep some order,
"Quiet, battalions;silence! Hear your royal kings!"
The men were forced to their seats, marshaled into ranks,
the shouting died away .., silence.
King Agamemnon
rose to his feet, raising high in hand the scepter
Hephaestus made with all his strength and skill.
Hephaestus gave it la Cronus' son, Father Zeus,

[73-1021

90

100

110

120

{IOJ-J5j

BOOK 2:



and Zeus gave it to Hermes, the giant-killing Guide
and Hermes gave it to Pelops, that fine charioteer,
Pelops gave it to Atreus, marshal of fighting men,
who died and passed it on to Thyestes rich in flocks
and he in turn bestowed it on Agamemnon, to bear on high
as he ruled his many islands and lorded mainland Argos.
Now, leaning his weight upon that kingly scepter,
Atrides declared his will to all Achaea's armies:
"Friends-fighting Danaans, aides-in-arms of Ares!
Cronus' son has trapped me in madness, blinding ruinZeus is a harsh, cruel god. He vowed to me long ago,
he bowed his head that I should never embark for home
till I had brought the walls of Ilium crashing down.
But now, I see, he only plotted brutal treachery:
now he commands me back to Argos in disgrace,
whole regiments of my men destroyed in battle.
So it must please his overweening heart, who knows?
Father Zeus has lopped the crowns of a thousand cities,
true, and Zeus will lop still more-his power is too great.
What humiliation! Even for generations still to come,
to learn that Achaean armies so strong, so vast,
fought a futile war ... We are still fighting it,
no end in sight, and battling forces we outnumberby far. Say that Trojans and Argives both agreed
to swear a truce, to seal their oaths in blood,
and opposing sides were tallied out in full:
count one by one the Trojans who live in Troy
but count our Achaeans out by ten-man squads
and each squad pick a Trojan to pour its winemany Achaean tens would lack their steward then!
That's how far we outnumber them, I'd say-Achaeans
to Trojans-the men who hail from Troy at least.
But they have allies called from countless cities,
fighters brandishing spears who block my way,
who throw me far off course,
thwarting my will to plunder Ilium's rugged walls.
And now nine years of almighty Zeus have marched by,
our ship limbers rot and the cables snap and fray

103

130

140

150

104

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

and across the sea our wives and helpless children
wait in the halls, wait for our return ... And we?
Our work drags on, unfinished as always, hopelessthe labor of war that brought us here to Troy.
So come, follow my orders. All obey me now.
Cut and run! Sail home to the fatherland we love!
We'll never take the broad streets of Troy."
Testing his men
but he only made the spirit race inside their chests,
all the rank and file who'd never heard his plan.
And the whole assembly surged like big waves at sea,
the lcarian Sea when East and South Winds drive it on,
blasting down in force from the clouds of Father Zeus,
or when the West Wind shakes the deep standing grain
with hurricane gusts that flatten down the stalks-so the massed assembly of troops was shaken now.
They cried in alarm and charged toward the ships
and the dust went whirling up from under rushing feet
as the men jostled back and forth, shouting orders"Grapple the ships! Drag them down to the bright sea!
Clean out the launching-channels!" Shrill shouts
hitting the heavens, fighters racing for home,
knocking the blocks out underneath the hulls.
And now they might have won their journey home,
the men of Argos fighting the will of fate, yes,
if Hera had not alerted Athena: "Inconceivable!
Child of Zeus whose battle-shield is thunder,
tireless one, Athena-what, is this the way?
All the Argives flying home to their fatherland,
sailing over the sea's broad back? Leaving Priam
and all the men of Troy a trophy to glory over,
Helen of Argos. Helen for whom so many Argives
lost their lives in Troy, far from native land.
Go, range the ranks of Achaeans armed in bronze.
With your winning words hold back each man you finddon't let them haul their rolling ships to sea!"

[1J6-65[

160

170

180

190

( 166-97/

BOOK 2:



The bright-eyed goddess Pallas lost no time.
Down she flashed from the peaks of Mount Olympus,
quickly reached the ships and found Odysseus first,
a mastermind like Zeus, still standing fast.
He had not laid a hand on his black benched hull,
such anguish racked his heart and fighting spirit.
Now close beside him the bright-eyed goddess stood
and urged him on: "Royal son of Laertes, Odysseus,
great tactician-what, is this the way?
All you Argives flying home to your fatherland,
tumbling into your oar-swept ships? Leaving Priam
and all the men of Troy a trophy to glory over,
Helen of Argos, Helen for whom so many Argives
lost their lives in Troy, far from native land!
No, don't give up now. Range the Achaean ranks,
with your winning words hold back each man you finddon't let them haul their rolling ships to sea!"

105

200

210

He knew the goddess' voice-he went on the run,
flinging off his cape as Eurybates picked it up,
the herald of Ithaca always at his side.
Coming face-to-face with Atrides Agarnernnon,
he relieved him of his fathers' royal scepterits power can never die-and grasping it tightly
off he strode to the ships of Argives armed in bronze.
Whenever Odysseus met some man of rank, a king,
he'd halt and hold him back with winning words:
"My friend-it's wrong to threaten you like a coward,
but you stand fast, you keep your men in check!
It's too soon to see Agamemnon's purpose clearly.
Now he's only testing us, soon he'll bear down hard.
Didn't we all hear his plan in secret council?
God forbid his anger destroy the army he commands.
The rage of kings is strong, they're nursed by the gods,
their honor comes from Zeusthey're dear to Zeus, the god who rules the world."

220

106

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

When he caught some common soldier shouting out,
he'd beat him with the scepter, dress him down:
"You fool-sit still! Obey the commands of others,
your superiors-you, you deserter, rank coward,
you count for nothing, neither in war nor council.
How can all Achaeans be masters here in Troy?
Too many kings can ruin an army-mob rule!
Let there be one commander, one master only,
endowed by the son of crooked-minded Cronus
with kingly scepter and royal rights of custom:
whatever one man needs to lead his people well."
So he ranged the ranks, commanding men to orderand back again they surged from ships and shelters,
back to the meeting grounds with a deep pounding din,
thundering out as battle lines of breakers crash and drag
along some endless beach, and the rough sea roars.
The armies took their seats, marshaled into ranks.
But one man, Thersites, still railed on, nonstop.
His head was full of obscenities, teeming with rant,
all for no good reason, insubordinate, baiting the kingsanything to provoke some laughter from the troops.
Here was the ugliest man who ever came to Troy.
Bandy-legged he was, with one foot clubbed,
both shoulders humped together, curving over
his caved-in chest, and bobbing above them
his skull warped to a point,
sprouting clumps of scraggly, woolly hair.
Achilles despised him most. Odysseus toohe was always abusing both chiefs, but now
he went for majestic Agamemnon, hollering out,
taunting the king with strings of cutting insults.
The Achaeans were furious with him, deeply offended.
But he kept shouting at Agamemnon, spewing his abuse:
"Still moaning and groaning, mighty Atrides-why now?
What are you panting after now? Your shelters packed
with the lion's share of bronze, plenty of women too.

[1 98-226[

. 230

240

250

260

[227-56/

BOOK 2:



crowding your lodges. Best of the lot, the beauties
we hand you first, whenever we take some stronghold.
Or still more gold you're wanting? More ransom a son
of the stallion-breaking Trojans might just fetch from Troy?though I or another hero drags him back in chains . . .
Or a young woman, is it?-to spread and couple,
to bed down for yourself apart from all the troops?
How shameful for you, the high and mighty commander,
to lead the sons of Achaea into bloody slaughter!
Sons? No, my soft friends, wretched excuseswomen, not men of Achaea! Home we go in our ships!
Abandon him here in Troy to wallow in all his prizeshe'll see if the likes of us have propped him up or not.
Look-now it's Achilles, a greater man he disgraces,
seizes and keeps his prize, tears her away himself.
But no gall in Achilles. Achilles lets it go.
If not, Atrides, that outrage would have been your last!"
So Thersites taunted the famous field marshal.
But Odysseus stepped in quickly, faced him down
with a dark glance and threats to break his nerve:
"What a flood of abuse. Thersites! Even for you,
fluent and flowing as you are. Keep quiet.
Who are you to wrangle with kings, you alone?
No one, I say-no one alive less soldierly than you,
none in the ranks that came to Troy with Agamemnon.
So stop your babbling, mouthing the names of kings,
flinging indecencies in their teeth, your eyes
peeled for a chance to cut and run for home.
We can have no idea, no clear idea at all
how the long campaign will end ...
whether Achaea's sons will make it home unharmed
or slink back in disgrace.
But there you sit,
hurling abuse at the son of Atreus, Agamemnon,
marshal of armies, simply because our fighters
give Atrides the lion's share of all our plunder.
You and your ranting slander-you're the outrage.

107

270

280

290

300

108

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

{257-88{

I tell you this, so help me it's the truth:
if I catch you again, blithering on this way,
let Odysseus' head be wrenched off his shoulders,
never again call me the father of Telernachus
if I don't grab you, strip the clothing off you,
cloak, tunic and rags that wrap your private pans,
and whip you howling naked back to the fast ships,
out of the armies' muster-whip you like a cur!"
And he cracked the scepter across his back and shoulders.
The rascal doubled over, tears streaking his face
and a bloody welt bulged up between his blades,
under the stroke of the golden scepter's studs.
He squatted low, cringing, stunned with pain,
blinking like some idiot ...
rubbing his tears off dumbly with a fist.
Their morale was low but the men laughed now,
good hearty laughter breaking over Thersites' headglancing at neighbors they would shout, "A terrific stroke!
A thousand terrific strokes he's carried off-odysseus,
taking the lead in tactics, mapping battle-plans.
But here's the best thing yet he's done for the menhe's put a stop to this babbling, foulmouthed fool!
Never again, I'd say, will our gallant comrade
risk his skin to attack the kings with insults."
So the soldiers bantered but not Odysseus.
The raider of cities stood there, scepter in hand,
and close beside him the great gray-eyed Athena
rose like a herald, ordering men to silence. All,
from the first to lowest ranks of Achaea's troops,
should hear his words and mark his counsel well.
For the good of all he urged them: "Agamemnonl
Now, my king, the Achaeans are bent on making you
a disgrace in the eyes of every man alive. Yes,
they fail to fulfill their promise sworn that day
they sailed here from the stallion-land of Argos:
that not until you had razed the rugged walls of Troy

310

320

:no

{288-3/6/

BOOK 2:



would they sail home again. But look at them now,
like green, defenseless boys or widowed women
whimpering to each other, wailing to journey back.
True, they've labored long-they're desperate for home.
Any fighter, cut off from his wife for one month,
would chafe at the benches, moaning in his ship,
pinned down by gales and heavy, raging seas.
A month-s-but look at us.
This is the ninth year come round, the ninth
we've hung on here. Who could blame the Achaeans
for chafing, bridling beside the beaked ships?
Ah but still-what a humiliation it would be
to hold out so long, then sail home empty-handed.
Courage, my friends, hold out a little longer.
Till we see if Calchas divined the truth or not.
We all recall that moment-who could forget it?
We were all witnesses then. All, at least,
the deadly spirits have not dragged away ...
Why,
it seems like only yesterday or the day before
when our vast armada gathered, moored at Aulis,
freighted with slaughter bound for Priam's Troy.
We were all busy then, milling round a spring
and offering victims up on the holy altars,
full sacrifice to the gods to guarantee success,
under a spreading plane tree where the water splashed,
glittering in the sun-when a great omen appeared.
A snake, and his back streaked red with blood.
a thing of terror! Olympian Zeus himself
had launched him into the clean light of day ...
He slid from under the altar, glided up the tree
and there the brood of a sparrow, helpless young ones,
teetered high on the topmost branch-tips, cowering
under the leaves there, eight they were all told
and the mother made the ninth, she'd borne them allchirping 10 break the heart but the snake gulped them down
and the mother cried out for her babies, fluttering over him ...
he coiled, struck, fanging her wing-a high thin shriek!

109

340

350

360

310

HO

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

But once he'd swallowed down the sparrow with her brood,
the son of crooked Cronus who sent the serpent forth
turned him into a sign, a monument clear to see-Zeus struck him to stone! And we stood by,'
amazed that such a marvel came to light.
So then,
when those terrible, monstrous omens burst in
OJ;l the victims we were offering to the gods,
Calchas swiftly revealed the will of Zeus:
'Why struck dumb now, my long-hatred Achaeans?
Zeus who rules the world has shown us an awesome sign,
an event long in the future, late to come to birth
but the fame of that great work will never die.
As the snake devoured the sparrow with her brood,
eight and the mother made the ninth, she'd borne them all,
so we will fight in Troy that many years and then.
then in the tenth we'll take her broad streets.'
So that day the prophet revealed the future-sand now, look, by god, it all comes to pass!
Up with you, all you Argives geared for combat,
stand your ground, right here,
until we take the mighty walls of Priam!"
He fired them so
the armies roared and the ships resounded round them,
shattering echoes ringing from their shouts
as Argives cried assent to King Odysseus' words.
And Nestor the noble horseman spurred them more:
"What disgrace! Look at you, carrying on
in the armies' muster just like boys-fools!
Not a thought in your heads for works of battle.
What becomes of them now, the pacts and oaths we swore?
Into the flames with councils, all the plans of men,
the vows sealed with the strong, unmixed wine,
the firm clasp of the right hand we trusted!
We battle on in words, as always, mere words,
and what's the cure? We cannot find a thing.
No matter how many years we wrangle here.
Agamemnon-

[317-44/

380

390

400

{344-74/

BOOK 2:



never swerve, hold to your first plan of action,
lead your armies headlong into war!
The rest of them? Let them rot, the one or two
who hatch their plans apart from all the troopswhat good can they win from that? Nothing at all.
Why, they'd scuttle home before they can even learn
if the vows of Zeus with his dark cloudy shield
are false or not. Zeus the son of almighty Cronus.
I remind you, bowed his head that day we boarded ship, .
all the Argives laden with blood and death for Troyhis lightning bolts on the right, good omens blazing forth.
So now let no man hurry to sail for home, not yet. . .
not till he beds down with a faithful Trojan wife,
payment in full for the groans and shocks of war
we have all borne for Helen.
But any soldier
wild with desire to reach his home at oncejust let him lay a hand on his black benched ship
and right in front of the rest he'll reach his death!
But you, my King, be on your guard yourself. Come,
listen well to another man. Here's some advice,
not to be tossed aside, and I will tell it clearly.
Range your men by tribes, even by clans, Agamemnon,
so clan fights by the side of clan, tribe by tribe.
Fight this way, if the Argives still obey you,
then you can see which captain is a coward,
which contingent too, and which is loyal, brave,
since they will fight in separate formations of their own.
Then, what's more, if you fail to sack the city,
you will know if the will of god's to blame
or the cowardice of your men-inept in battle."
And King Agamemnon took his lead, saluting:
"Again, old man, you outfight the Argives in debate I
Father Zeus, Athena, Apollo, if only I had ten men
like Nestor to plan with me among Achaea's armiesthen we could topple Priarn's citadel in a day,
throttle it in our hands and gut Troy to nothing.

III

410

420

430

440

112

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

{375-404)

But Cronus' son, Zeus with his shield of storm
insists on embroiling me in painful struggles,
futile wars of words ...
Imagine-I and Achilles, wrangling over a girl,
battling man-to-man. And 1, I was the first
450
to let my anger flare. Ah if the two of us
could ever think as one, Troy could delay
her day of death no longer, not one moment.
Go now, take your meal-the sooner to bring on war.
Quickly-let each fighter sharpen his spear well,
balance his shield well, feed his horses well
with plenty of grain to build their racing speedeach man look well to his chariot's running order,
nerve himself for combat now, so all day long
we can last out the grueling duels of Ares!
460
No breathing space, no letup, not a moment, not
till the night comes on to part the fighters' fury!
Now sweat will soak the shield-strap round your chest,
your fist gripping the spear will ache with tensing,
now the lather will drench your war-team's flanks,
hauling your sturdy chariot.
But any man I catch,
trying to skulk behind his long beaked ships,
hanging back from battle-he is finished.
No way for him to escape the dogs and birds!"
So he commanded
and the armies gave a deep resounding roar like waves
470
crashing against a cliff when the South Wind whips it,
bearing down, some craggy headland jutting out to seathe waves will never leave it in peace, thrashed by gales
that hit from every quarter, breakers left and right.
The troops sprang up, scattered back to the ships,
lit fires beside their tents and took their meal.
Each sacrificed to one or another deathless god,
each man praying to flee death and the grind of war.
But the lord of men Agamemnon sacrificed a fat rich ox,
five years old, to the son of mighty Cronus, Zeus,
480
and called the chiefs of all the Argive forces:

{405-37J

BOOK 2:



Nestor first and foremost, then King Idomeneus,
the Great and Little Ajax, Tydeus' son Diomedes
and Odysseus sixth, a mastermind like Zeus.
The lord of the war cry Menelaus came uncalled.
he knew at heart what weighed his brother down.
They stood in a ring around the ox, took up barley
and then, rising among them, King Agamemnon
raised his voice in prayer: "Zeus, Zeus,
god of greatness, god of glory, lord god
of the dark clouds who lives in the bright sky,
don't let the sun go down or the night descend on us!
Not till I hurl the smoke-black halls of Priam headlongtorch his gates to blazing rubble-rip the tunic of Hector
and slash his heroic chest to ribbons with my bronzeand a ruck of comrades round him, groveling facedown,
gnaw their own earth!"
And so Agamemnon prayed
but the son of Cronus would not bring his prayer to pass,
not yet .., the Father accepted the sacrifices, true,
but doubled the weight of thankless, ruthless war. ,
Once the men had prayed and flung the barley,
first they lifted back the heads of the victims,
slit their throats, skinned them and carved away
the meat from the thighbones and wrapped them in fat,
a double fold sliced clean and topped with strips of flesh.
And they burned these on a cleft stick, peeled and dry.
spitted the vitals, held them over Hephaestus' flames
and once they'd charred the thighs and tasted the organs
they cut the rest into pieces, pierced them with spits,
roasted them to a turn and pulled them off the fire.
The work done, the feast laid out, they ate well
and no man's hunger lacked a share of the banquet.
When they had put aside desire for food and drink.
Nestor the noble old horseman spoke out first:
..Marshal Atrides, lord of men Agamemnon.
no more trading speeches now. No more delay.
putting off the work the god puts in our hands.
Come, let the heralds cry out to all contingents,

113

490

500

510

114

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

{4J7-67}

full battle-armor, muster the men along the ships.
Now down we go, united-review them as we pass.
Down through the vast encampment of Achaea,
the faster to rouse the slashing god of warl"
Agamemnon the lord of men did not resist.
He commanded heralds to cry out loud and clear
and summon the long-haired Achaean troops to battle.
Their cries rang out. The battalions gathered quickly.
The warlords dear to the gods and flanking Agamemnon
strode on ahead, marshaling men-at-arms in files,
and down their ranks the fiery-eyed Athena bore
her awesome shield of storm, ageless, deathlessa hundred golden tassels, all of them braided tight
and each worth a hundred oxen, float along the front.
Her shield of lightning dazzling, swirling around her,
headlong on Athena swept through the Argive armies,
driving soldiers harder, lashing the fighting-fury
in each Achaean's heart-no stopping them now,
mad for war and struggle. Now, suddenly,
battle thrilled them more than the journey home,
than sailing hollow ships to their dear native land.
As ravening fire rips through big stands of timber
high on a mountain ridge and the blaze flares miles away,
so from the marching troops the blaze of bronze armor,
splendid and superhuman, flared across the earth,
flashing into the air to hit the skies.
Armies gathering now
as the huge flocks on flocks of winging birds, geese or cranes
or swans with their long lancing necks-circling Asian marshes
round the Cayster outflow, wheeling in all directions,
glorying in their Wings-keep on landing, advancing,
wave on shrieking wave and the tidal flats resound.
So tribe on tribe, pouring out of the ships and shelters,
marched across the Scamander plain and the earth shook,
tremendous thunder from under trampling men and horses
drawing into position down the Scamander meadow flats

520

530

550

(467-961

BOOK 2:



115

breaking into flower-men by the thousands, numberless
as the leaves and spears that flower forth in spring.
The armies massing .., crowding thick-and-fast
as the swarms of flies seething over the shepherds' stalls
in the first spring days when the buckets flood with milkso many long-haired Achaeans swarmed across the plain
to confront the Trojans, fired to smash their lines.
The armies grouping now-as seasoned goatherds
split their wide-ranging flocks into packs with ease
when herds have mixed together down the pasture:
so the captains formed their tight platoons,
detaching right and left, moving up for actionand there in the midst strode powerful Agamemnon,
eyes and head like Zeus who loves the lightning,
great in the girth like Ares, god of battles,
broad through the chest like sea lord Poseidon.
Like a bull rising head and shoulders over the herds,
a royal bull rearing over his flocks of driven cattleso imposing was Atreus' son, so Zeus made him that day,
towering over fighters, looming over armies.

BOOK THREE

Helen Reviews
the Champions
Now with the squadrons marshaled, captains leading each,
the Trojans came with cries and the din of war like wildfowl
when the long hoarse cries of cranes sweep on against the sky
and the great formations flee from winter's grim ungodly storms,
flying in force, shrieking south to the Ocean gulfs, speeding
blood and death to the Pygmy warriors, laonching at daybreak
savage battle down upon their heads. But Achaea's armies
came on strong in silence, breathing combat-fury,
hearts ablaze to defend each other to the death.
When the South Wind showers mist on the mouruaintops,
no friend to shepherds, better than night to thievesyou can see no farther than you can fling a stone-so dust came clouding, swirling up from the feet of armies
marching at top speed, trampling through the plain.
128

10

[15-431

BOOK 3:



Now closer, closing, front to front in the onset
till Paris sprang from the Trojan forward ranks,
a challenger, lithe, magnificent as a god,
the skin of a leopard slung across his shoulders,
a reflex bow at his back and battle-sword at hip
and brandishing two sharp spears tipped in bronze
he strode forth, challenging all the Argive best
to fight him face-to-face in mortal combat.
Soon as the warrior Menelaus marked him,
Paris parading there with his big loping strides,
flaunting before the troops, Atrides thrilled
like a lion lighting on some handsome carcass,
lucky to find an antlered stag or wild goat
just as hunger strikes-he rips it, bolts it down,
even with running dogs and lusty hunters rushing him.
So Menelaus thrilled at heart-princely Paris there,
right before his eyes. The outlaw, the adulterer ...
"Now for revenge!" he thought, and down he leapt
from his chariot fully armed and hit the ground.
But soon as magnificent Paris marked Atrides
shining among the champions, Paris' spirit shook.
Backing into his friendly ranks, he cringed from death
as one who trips on a snake in a hilltop hollow
recoils, suddenly, trembling grips his knees
and pallor takes his cheeks and back he shrinks.
So he dissolved again in the proud Trojan lines,
dreading Atrides-magnificent, brave Paris.
At one glance
Hector raked his brother with insults, stinging taunts:
"Paris, appalling Paris! Our prince of beautymad for women, you lure them all to ruin!
Would to god you'd never been born, died unwed.
That's all I'd ask. Better that way by far
than to have you strutting here, an outragea mockery in the eyes of all our enemies. Why,
the long-haired Achaeans must be roaring with laughter!

129

20

30

40

130

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

They thought you the bravest champion we could field.
and just because of the handsome luster on your limbs.
but you have no pith, no fighting strength inside you.
What?-is this the man who mustered the oarsmen once,
who braved the seas in his racing deep-sea ships,
trafficked with outlanders, carried off a woman
far from her distant shores, a great beauty
wed to a land of rugged spearmen?
You ...
curse to your father, your city and all your people.
a joy to our enemies, rank disgrace to yourselfl
So, you can't stand up to the battling Menelaus?
You'd soon feel his force, that man you robbed
of his sumptuous, warm wife. No use to you then.
the fine lyre and these, these gifts of Aphrodite,
your long flowing locks and your striking looks.
not when you roll and couple with the dust.
What cowards, the men of Troy-or years ago
they'd have decked you out in a suit of rocky armor,
stoned you to death for all the wrongs you've done!"
And Paris, magnificent as a god, replied.
"AhHector, you criticize me fairly, yes,
nothing unfair, beyond what I deserve.
The heart inside you is always tempered hard.
like an ax that goes through wood when a shipwright
cuts out ship timbers with every ounce of skill
and the blade's weight drives the man's stroke.
So the heart inside your chest is never daunted.
Still, don't fling in my face the lovely gifts
of golden Aphrodite. Not to be tossed aside,
the gifts of the gods, those glories ...
whatever the gods give of their own free willhow could we ever choose them for ourselves?
Now, though.
if you really want me to fight to the finish here.
have all Trojans and Argives take their seats
and pit me against Menelaus dear to Ares-

[44-70J

50

60

70

80

[69-98/

BOOK 3:



right between the lineswe'll fight it out for Helen and all her wealth.
And the one who proves the better man and wins,
he'll take those treasures fairly, lead the woman home.
The rest will seal in blood their binding pacts of friendship.
Our people will live in peace on the rich soil of Troy,
our enemies sail home to the stallion-land of Argos,
the land of Achaea where the women are a wonder ..."
When Hector heard that challenge he rejoiced
and right in the no man's land along his lines he strode,
gripping his spear mid-haft, staving men to a standstill.
But the long-haired Argive archers aimed at Hector,
trying to cut him down with arrows, hurling rocks
till King Agamemnon cried out in a ringing voice,
"Hold back, Argives! Sons of Achaea, stop your salvos!
Look, Hector with that flashing helmet of histhe man is trying to tell us something now."
They held their attack. Quickly men fell silent
and Hector pleaded, appealing to both armed camps:
"Hear me--Trojans, Achaeans geared for combat!
Hear the challenge of Paris,
the man who caused our long hard campaign.
He urges all the Trojans, all the Argives too,
to lay their fine armor down on the fertile earth
while Paris himself and the warrior Menelaus
take the field between you and fight it out
for Helen and all her wealth in single combat.
And the one who proves the better man and wins,
he'll take those treasures fairly, lead the woman home.
The rest will seal in blood their binding pacts of friendship."
He stopped. A hushed silence held the ranks.
And Menelaus whose cry could marshal armies
urged both sides, "Now hear me out as well!
Such limited vengeance hurts me most of a11but I intend that we will part in peace, at last,

131

90

100

110

132

HOMER:

THE IliAD

Trojans and Achaeans. Look what heavy casualties
you have suffered just for me, my violent quarrel,
and Paris who brought it on you all. Now we'll fightand death to the one marked out for doom and death!
But the rest will part in peace, and soon, soon.
Bring two lambs-a white male and a black ewe
for the Sun and Earth-and we'll bring a third for Zeus.
And lead on Priam too, Priam in all his power,
so the king himself can seal our truce in bloodhis royal sons are reckless, not to be trusted:
no one must trample on the oath We swear to Zeus.
The minds of the younger men are always flighty,
but let an old man stand his ground among them,
one who can see the days behind, the days aheadthat is the best hope for peace, for both our armies."

[99-/28}

120

130

The Achaean and Trojan forces both exulted,
hoping this would end the agonies of war.
They hauled their chariots up in ranks, at rest,
the troops dismounted and stripped away their arms
and laid them down on the earth, crowded togetherhardly a foot of plowland showed between them.
Back to the city Hector sent two heralds now
to bring the lambs at once and summon Priam
while King Agamemnon sent Talthybius off,
heading down to the ships for one more lamb.
The herald obeyed his captain's orders quickly.

140

And now a messenger went to white-armed Helen too,
Iris, looking for all the world like Hector's sister
wed to Antenor's son, Helicaon's bride Laodice,
the loveliest daughter Priam ever bred.
And Iris came on Helen in her rooms . . .
weaving a growing web, a dark red folding robe,
working into the weft the endless bloody struggles
stallion-breaking Trojans and Argives armed in bronze
had suffered all for her at the god of battle's hands.

150

{/29-581

BOOK 3:



Iris, racing the wind, brushed close and whispered,
"Come, dear girl, come quicklyso you can see what wondrous things they're doing.
stallion-breaking Trojans and Argives armed in bronze!
A moment ago they longed to kill each other, longed
for heartbreaking, inhuman warfare on the plain.
Now those very warriors stand at ease, in silencethe fighting's stopped, they lean against their shields,
their long lances stuck in the ground beside them.
Think of it: Paris and Menelaus loved by Ares
go to fight it out with their rugged spearsall for you-and the man who wins that duel,
you'll be called his wife!"
And with those words
the goddess filled her heart with yearning warm and deep
for her husband long ago, her city and her parents.
Quickly cloaking herself in shimmering linen.
out of her rooms she rushed, live tears welling.
and not alone-two of her women followed close behind.
Aethra. Pittheus' daughter, and Clymene, eyes wide,
and they soon reached the looming Scaean Gates.
And there they were, gathered around Priam,
Panthous and Thvmoetes, Lampus and Clytius,
Hicetaon the gray aide of Ares, then those two
with unfailing good sense, Ucalegon and Antenor.
The old men of the realm held seats above the gates.
Long years had brought their fighting days to a halt
but they were eloquent speakers still, clear as cicadas
settled on treetops, lifting their voices through the forest,
rising softly, falling, dying away ... So they waited,
the old chiefs of Troy, as they sat aloft the tower.
And catching sight of Helen moving along the ramparts,
they murmured one to another, gentle, winged words:
"Who on earth could blame them? Ah, no wonder
the men of Troy and Argives under anus have suffered
years of agony all for her, for such a woman.
Beauty, terrible beauty!

133

160

170

180

190

134

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

[158-831

A deathless goddess-so she strikes our eyes!
But still,
ravishing as she is, let her go home in the long ships
and not be left behind .., for us and our children
down the years an irresistible sorrow."
They murmured low
but Priarn, raising his voice, called across to Helen,
"Come over here, dear child. Sit in front of me.
so you can see your husband of long ago,
your kinsmen and your people.
I don't blame you. I hold the gods to blame.
They are the ones who brought this war upon me,
devastating war against the AchaeansHere, come closer.
tell me the name of that tremendous fighter. Look,
, who's that Achaean there, so stark and grand?
Many others afield are much taller, true,
but I have never yet set eyes on one so regal.
so majestic ... That man must be a king!"

200

And Helen the radiance of women answered Priam.
"I revere you so, dear father, dread you too-

if only death had pleased me then, grim death.
that day I followed your son to Troy, forsaking
my marriage bed, my kinsmen and my child.
my favorite, now full-grown.
and the lovely comradeship of women my own age.
Death never came, so now I can only waste away in tears.
But about your question-yes. I have the answer.
That man is Atreus' son Agamemnon, lord of empires.
both a mighty king and a strong spearman too.
and he used to be my kinsman, whore that I am!
There was a world .., or was it all a dream?"
Her voice broke but the old king, lost in wonder.
cried out, "How lucky you are, son of Atreus,
child of fortune, your destiny so blessed!
Look at the vast Achaean armies you command!

210

220

f/84-214f

BOOK 3:



Years ago I visited Phrygia rife with vineyards,
saw the Phrygian men with their swarming horses theremultitudes-the armies of Otreus, Mygdon like a god,
encamped that time along the Sangarius River banks.
And I took my stand among them, comrade-in-arms
the day the Amazons struck, a match for men in war.
But not even those hordes could match these hordes of yours,
your fiery-eyed Achaeans!"
And sighting Odysseus next
the old king questioned Helen, "Come, dear child,
tell me of that one too-now who is he?
Shorter than Atreus' son Agamemnon, clearly,
but broader across the shoulders, through the chest.
There, you see? His armor's heaped on the green field
but the man keeps ranging the ranks of fighters like a ramyes, he looks to me like a thick-fleeced bellwether ram
making his way through a big mass of sheep-flocks,
shining silver-gray."
Helen the child of Zeus replied,
"That's Laertes' son, the great tactician Odysseus,
He was bred in the land of Ithaca. Rocky ground
and he's quick at every treachery under the sunthe man of twists and turns."
Helen paused
and the shrewd Antenor carried on her story:
"Straight to the point, my lady, very true.
Once in the past he came our way, King Odysseus
heading the embassy they sent for your release,
together with Menelaus dear to Ares.
I hosted them, treated them warmly in my halls
and learned the ways of both, their strategies, their traits.
Now, when they mingled with our Trojans in assembly,
standing side-by-side, Menelaus' shoulders
mounted over his friend's in height and spread,
when both were seated Odysseus looked more lordly.
But when they spun their appeals before us all,
Menelaus spoke out quickly-his words racing,
few but clear as a bell, nothing long-winded

135

230

240

250

136

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

or off the mark, though in fact the man was younger.
But when Odysseus sprang up, the famed tactician
would just stand there, staring down, hard.
his eyes fixed on the ground,
never shifting his scepter back and forth,
clutching it stiffand still like a mindless man.
You'd think him a sullen fellow or just plain fool.
But when he let loose that great voice from his chest
and the words came piling on like a driving winter blizzardthen no man alive could rival Odysseus! Odysseus ...
we no longer gazed in wonder at his looks."
Catching sight
of a third fighter, Ajax, the old king asked her next,
"Who's that other Achaean, so powerful, so well-built?
He towers over the Argives, his head, his massive shoulders!"
And Helen in all her radiance, her long robes, replied,
"Why, that's the giant Ajax, bulwark of the Achaeans.
And Idomeneus over there-standing with his Cretanslike a god, you see? And the Cretan captains
form a ring around him. How often Menelaus,
iny good soldier, would host him in our halls,
in the old days, when he'd sail across from Crete.
And now I see them all, the fiery-eyed Achaeans,
I know them all by heart, and I could tell their names . . .
but two I cannot find, and they're captains of the armies,
Castor breaker of horses and the hardy boxer Polydeuces.
My blood brothers. Mother bore them both. Perhaps
they never crossed over from Lacedaemon's lovely hills
or come they did, sailing here in the deep-sea ships,
but now they refuse to join the men in battle,
dreading the scorn, the curses hurled at me ..."
So she wavered, but the earth already held them fast.
long dead in the life-giving earth of Lacedaemon,
the dear land of their fathers.
Now through Troy
the heralds brought the offerings for the gods,

[215-45/

260

270

280

290

[245-75/

BOOK 3:



sacred victims to bind and seal the oaths:
two lambs and the wine that warms the heart,
the yield of the vine, filling a goatskin sack,
and the herald Idaeus carried a gleaming bowl
and golden winecups. Reaching the old king's side
the crier roused him sharply: "Son of Laomedon, rise up!
They are calling for you now, commanders of both armies,
stallion-breaking Trojans and Argives armed in bronzecome down to the plain so you can seal our oaths.
Now Paris and Menelaus, Atrides loved by Ares,
will fight it out with their rugged spears for Helen,
and Helen and all her treasures go to the man who wins.
The rest will seal in blood their binding pacts of friendship.
Our people will live in peace on the rich soil of Troy.
Our enemies sail home to the stallion-land of Argos,
the land of Achaea where the women are a wonder."
A shudder went shooting through the old man
but he told his men to yoke the team at once.
They promptly obeyed and Priam climbed aboard,
pulling the reins back taut. Antenor flanked him,
mounting the gleaming car, and both men drove the team
through the Scaean Gates, heading toward the plain.
Reaching the front, they climbed down from the chariot,
onto the earth that feeds us all, and into the space
between Achaean and Trojan lines they marched.
Lord Agamemnon rose at once to greet them both
with the great tactician Odysseus by his side.
The noble heralds brought on the victims
marked for the gods to seal and bind the oaths.
They mixed the contenders' wine in a large bowl
and rinsed the warlords' waiting hands with water.
Atreus' son drew forth the dagger always slung
at his battle-sword's big sheath, cut some tufts
from the lambs' heads, and heralds passed them round
to Achaean and Trojan captains. Then Atreus' son

137

300

310

320

138

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

Agamemnon stood in behalf of all, lifted his arms
and prayed in his deep resounding voice, "Father Zeus!
Ruling over us all from Ida, god of greatness, god of glory!
Hellos, Sun above us, you who see all, hear all things!
Rivers! And Earth! And you beneath the ground
who punish the dead-whoever broke his oathbe witness here, protect our binding pacts.
If Paris brings Menelaus down in blood,
he keeps Helen himself and all her wealth
and we sail home in our racing deep-sea ships.
But if red-haired Menelaus brings down Paris,
the Trojans surrender Helen and all her treasures.
And they pay us reparations fair and fitting,
a prtce to inspire generations still to come.
But if Priam and Priam's sons refuse to pay,
refuse me, Agamemnon-e-with Paris beaten downthen I myself will fight it out for the ransom,
I'll battle here to the end of our long war."
On those terms
he dragged his ruthless dagger across the lambs' throats
and let them fall to the ground, dying, gasping away
their life breath, cut short by the sharp bronze.
Then dipping up the wine from the mixing bowls,
brimming their cups, pouring them on the earth,
men said their prayers to the gods who never die.
You could hear some Trojan or Achaean calling, "Zeusgod of greatness, god of glory, all you immortals!
Whichever contenders trample on this treaty first,
spill their brains on the ground as this wine spillstheirs, their children's too-their enemies rape their wives!"

But Zeus would not fulfill their prayers, not yet ...
Now Priam rose in their midst and took his leave:
"Hear me, Trojans, Achaeans geared for combathome I go to Windy Ilium, straight home now.
This is more than I can bear, I tell youto watch my son do battle with Menelaus

{275-J07j

HO

340

350

360

{J06-J9{

BOOK 3:



139

loved by the War-god, right before my eyes.
Zeus knows, no doubt, and every immortal too,
which fighter is doomed to end all this in death."

And laying the victims in the chariot, noble Priam
climbed aboard, pulling the reins back taut.
Antenor flanked him, mounting the gleaming car,
and back they drove again, heading home to Troy.
But Priam's son Prince Hector and royal Odysseus
measured off the ground for single combat first,
then dropped two stones in a helmet, lots for castingwho would be first to hurl his bronze-tipped spear?
The armies prayed and stretched their hands to the gods,
You could hear some Trojan or Achaean pleading, "Father Zeusl
Ruling over us all from Ida, god of greatness, gloryI
Whoever brought this war on both our countries,
let him rot and sink to the House of Deathbut let our pacts of friendship all hold fast!"
So they prayed
as tall Hector, eyes averted under his flashing helmet,
shook the two lots hard and Paris' lot leapt out.
The troops sat down by rank, each beside his horses
pawing the ground where blazoned war-gear lay. And nowone warrior harnessed burnished armor on his back,
magnificent Paris, fair-hatred Helen's consort.
First he wrapped his legs with well-made greaves,
fastened behind the heels with silver ankle-clasps,
next he strapped a breastplate round his chest,
his brother Lycaon's that fitted him so well.
Then over his shoulder Paris slung his sword,
the fine bronze blade with its silver-studded hilt,
and then the shield-strap and his sturdy, massive shield
and over his powerful head he set a well-forged helmet,
the horsehair crest atop it tossing, bristling terror,
and last he grasped a spear that matched his grip,
Following step by step
the fighting Menelaus strapped on armor too.

l70

l80

390

140

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

Both men armed at opposing sides of the forces,
into the no man's land between the lines they strode,
glances menacing, wild excitement seizing all who watched,
the stallion-breaking Trojans and Argive men-at-arms.
Striking a stand in the dueling-ground just cleared
they brandished spears at each other, tense with fury.
Suddenly Paris hurled-his spear's long shadow flew
and the shaft hit MeneIaus' round shield, full centernot pounding through, the brazen point bent back
in the tough armor.
But his turn next-MeneIaus
reared with a bronze lance and a prayer to Father Zeus:
"Zeus. King, give me revenge, he wronged me first!
Illustrious Paris-crush him under my hand!
So even among the men to come a man may shrink
from wounding the host who showers him with kindness."

{340-73}

400

410

Shaking his spear, he hurled and its long shadow flew
and the shaft hit Paris' round shield, hit full centerstraight through the gleaming hide the heavy weapon drove,
ripping down and in through the breastplate finely worked,
tearing the war-shirt, close by Paris' flank it jabbed
but the Trojan swerved aside and dodged black death.
So now Menelaus drew his sword with silver studs
and hoisting the weapon high, brought it crashing down
on the helmet ridge but the blade smashed where it struckjagged shatters flying-it dropped from Atrides' hand
and the hero cried out, scanning the blank skies,
"Father Zeus-no god's more deadly than you!
Here I thought I'd punish Paris for all his outragenow my sword is shattered, right in my hands, look,
my spear flew from my grip for nothing-I never hit him!"

420

Lunging at Paris, he grabbed his horsehair crest,
swung him round, started to drag him into Argive lines
and now the braided chin-strap holding his helmet tight
was gouging his soft throat-Paris was choking, strangling.
Now he'd have hauled him off and won undying glory

430



but Aphrodite, Zeus's daughter quick to the mark,
snapped the rawhide strap, cut from a bludgeoned ox,
and the helmet came off empty in Menelaus' fist.
Whirling it round the fighter sent it flying
into his Argives scrambling fast to retrieve itback at his man he sprang, enraged with brazen spear,
mad for the kill but Aphrodite snatched Paris away,
easy work for a god, wrapped him in swirls of mist
and set him down in his bedroom filled with scent.
Then off she went herself to summon Helen
and found her there on the steep, jutting tower
with a troop of Trojan women clustered round her.
The goddess reached and tugged at her fragrant robe,
whispering low, for all the world like an old crone,
the old weaver who, when they lived in Lacedaemon,
wove her fine woolens and Helen held her dear.
Like her to the life, immortal Love invited,
"Quickly-Paris is caIling for you, come back home!
There he is in the bedroom, the bed with inlaid ringshe's glistening in all his beauty and his robes!
You'd never dream he's come from fighting a man,
you'd think he's off to a dance or slipped away
from the dancing, stretching out at ease."
Enticing so
that the heart in Helen's breast began to race.
She knew the goddess at once, the long lithe neck,
the smooth full breasts and the fire in those eyesand she was amazed, she burst out with her name:
"Maddening one, my Goddess, oh what now?
Lusting to lure me to my ruin yet again?
Where will you drive me next?
Offand away to other grand, luxurious cities,
out to Phrygia, out to Maeonia's tempting country?
Have you a favorite mortal man there too?
But why now?because Menelaus has beaten your handsome Paris
and hateful as I am, he longs to take me home?
Is that why you beckon here beside me now

141

440

450

460

142

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

1405-31j

with all the immortal cunning in your heart?
Well, go to him yourself-you hover beside him!
Abandon the gods' high road and be a mortal!
Never set foot again on Mount Olympus, never!suffer for Paris, protect Paris, for eternity ...
until he makes you his wedded wife-that or his slave.
Not L I'll never go back again. It would be wrong,
disgraceful to share that coward's bed once more.
The women of Troy would scorn me down the years.
Oh the torment-never-ending heartbreak!"
But Aphrodite rounded on her in fury:
"Don't provoke me-wretched, headstrong girl!
Or in my immortal rage I may just toss you over,
hate you as I adore you now-with a vengeance.
I might make you the butt of hard, withering hate
from both sides at once, Trojans and Achaeansthen your fate can tread you down to dust!"
So she threatened
and Helen the daughter of mighty Zeus was terrified.
Shrouding herself in her glinting silver robes
she went along, in silence. None of her women
saw her go ... The goddess led the way.
And once they arrived at Paris' sumptuous halls
the attendants briskly turned to their own work
as Helen in all her radiance climbed the steps
to the bedroom under the high, vaulting roof.
There Aphrodite quickly brought her a chair,
the goddess herself with her everlasting smile,
and set it down, face-to-face with Paris.
And there Helen sat, Helen the child of Zeus
whose shield is storm and lightning, glancing away,
lashing out at her husband: "So, home from the warsl
Oh would to god you'd died there, brought down
by that great soldier, my husband long ago.
And how you used to boast, year in, year out,
that you were the better man than fighting Menelaus

470

480

490

500

{43/- 571

BOOK~:



in power, arm and spear! So why not go back now,
hurl your challenge at Menelaus dear to Ares.
fight it out together, man-to-man again?
Wait,
take my advice and call a halt right here:
no more battling with fiery-hatred Menelaus.
pitting strength against strength in single combatmadness. He just might impale you on his spear!"
But Paris replied at once to Helen's challenge:
"No more, dear one-don't rake me with your taunts,
myself and all my courage. This time, true,
Menelaus has won the day, thanks to Athena.
I'll bring him down tomorrow.
Even we have gods who battle on our side.
But comelet's go to bed, let's lose ourselves in love!
Never has longing for you overwhelmed me so,
no, not even then, I tell you, that first time
when I swept you up from the lovely hills of Lacedaemon,
sailed you off and away in the racing deep-sea ships
and we went and locked in love on Rocky Island ...
That was nothing to how I hunger for you nowirresistible longing lays me low!"
He led the way to bed. His wife went with him.
And now, while the two made love in the large carved bed,
Menelaus stalked like a wild beast, up and down the lineswhere could he catch a glimpse of magnificent Paris?
Not a single Trojan, none of their famous allies
could point out Paris to battle-hungry Menelaus.
Not that they would hide him out of friendship,
even if someone saw himall of them hated him like death, black death.
But marshal Agamemnon called out to the armies,
"Hear me now, you Trojans. Dardans, Trojan allies!
Clearly victory goes to Menelaus dear to Ares.

143

510

520

530

144

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

/458-61/

You must surrender Helen and all her treasure with her.
At once-and pay us reparations fair and fitting,
a price to inspire generations still to come!"
So Atrides demanded. His armies roared assent.

540

BOOK

FOUR

The Truce
Erupts in War
Now aloft by the side of Zeus the gods sat in council,
conferring across Olympus' golden floor as noble Hebe
poured them rounds of nectar. They lifted golden beakers,
pledging each other warmly, gazing down on Troy ...
But abruptly Zeus was set on infuriating Hera,
courting her fire with cunning, mocking taunts: "So,
those two goddesses there are Menelaus' best defense,
Hera of Argos. Boeotian Athena, guard of armies.
Look at them-sitting apart, watching the dueling.
So they take their pleasure. But Aphrodite here
with her everlasting laughter always stands by Paris
and drives the deadly spirits from her man. Why,
just now she plucked him away, she saved his life
when he thought his end had come. Nevertheless-clearly victory goes to Menelaus dear to Ares.

10

145

146

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

So now we plan how the war will all work out:
do we rouse the pain and grisly fighting once again
or hand down pacts of peace between both armies?
Ah if only it might prove well and good to all,
to every immortal god, men might still live on
in royal Priarn's citadel. And Helen of Argos?
Menelaus just might lead her home again."
So he mocked
as Athena and Queen Hera muttered between themselves,
huddled together, plotting Troy's destruction.
True, Athena held her peace and said nothing ...
smoldering at the Father, seized with wild resentment.
But Hera could hold the anger in her breast no longer,
suddenly bursting out, "Dread majesty, son of Cronus,
what are you saying? How can you think of making
all my labor worthless, all gone for nothing?
Mortal labor-the sweat 1 poured, my horses panting,
spent from launching Achaea's armies, heaping pains
on Priam and Priam's sons.
Do as you please-but none of the deathless gods will ever praise you."
Rising in anger, Zeus who drives the storm clouds
thundered, "Insatiable Hera! How great are the pains
that Priam and Priam's sons have heaped on you
that you rage on, relentless, forever bent on razing
the well-built heights of Troy? Only if you could breach
their gates and their long walls and devour Priam
and Priam's sons and the Trojan armies rawthen you just might cure your rage at last.
Well, do as you please. But in days to come
don't let this quarrel breed some towering clash
between us both, pitting you and me in conflict.
One more thing-take it to heart, I urge you.
Whenever I am bent on tearing down some city
filled with men you love-to please myselfnever attempt to thwart my fury, Hera,

{14-42{

20

lO

40

f42-72J

BOOK 4:

THE TRUCE ERUPTS IN WAR

give me my way. For I. I gave you this.
all of my own free will but hardly willing. No,
of all the cities under the sun and starry skies,
wherever men who walk the earth have dwelled,
I honor sacred Ilium most with my immortal heart:
Priam and men of Priam who hurls the strong ash spear.
Never once did my altar lack its share of victims,
winecups tipped and the deep smoky savor. These,
these are the gifts we claim-they are our rights."
And Hera the Queen, her eyes wide, answered,
"Excellent! The three cities that I love best of all
are Argos and Sparta. Mycenae with streets as broad as Troy's.
Raze them-whenever they stir the hatred in your heart.
My cities ... I will never rise in their defense.
not against you-I'd never grudge your pleasure.
What if I did protest, forbid you to raze their walls?
What good would protest do? You are far stronger than I.
Still, you must not make my labor come to nothing.
I am a god too. My descent the same as yourscrooked-minded Cronus fathered me as well,
the first of all his daughters, first both ways:
both by birth and since I am called your consort
and you in turn rule all the immortal gods.
So come, let us yield to each other now
on this one point, I to you and you to me,
and the other deathless powers will fall in line.
But quickly, order Athena down to battle now,
into the killing-ground of Trojans and Achaeansand see that the Trojans break the sworn truce first
and trample on the Argives in their triumph!"
The father of men and gods complied at once.
He winged Athena on with a flight of orders: "Quicklyl
Down you go to Troy's and Achaea's armies now- .
and see that the Trojans break the sworn truce first
and trample on the Argives in their triumph."

147
50

60

70

80

148

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

So he launched Athena already poised for action.
Down the goddess swept from Olympus' craggy peaks
and dove like a star the son of Cronus flings.
Cronus with all his turning, twisting waysa sign to men at sea or a massive army marching,
blazing on with a stream of sparks showering in its wake.
Like a shooting star Athena flashed across the earth,
plunging down in the midst of both camped forces.
Terror gripped the fighters looking on,
stallion-breaking Trojans, Argive men-at-arms.
One would glance at a comrade, groaning, "What nextbattle again, more pain and grisly, fighting?
Or pacts between both armies? Peace from Zeus,
the great steward on high who rules our mortal wars?"
BOOK

SIX

Hector
Returns to Troy
So the clash of Achaean and Trojan troops was on its own,
the battle in all its fury veering back and forth,
careering down the plain
as they sent their bronze lances hurtling side-to-side
between the Sirnois' banks and Xanthus' swirling rapids.
That Achaean bulwark giant Ajax came up first
broke the Trojan line and brought his men some hope,
spearing the bravest man the Thracians fielded,
Acamas tall and staunch, Eussorus' son.
The first to hurl. Great Ajax hit the ridge
of the helmet's horsehair crest-the bronze point
stuck in Acamas' forehead pounding through the skull
and the dark came swirling down to shroud his eyes.

10

195

196

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

A shattering war cry! Diomedes killed offAxylus,
Teuthras' son who had lived in rock-built Arisbe.
a man of means and a friend to all mankind,
at his roadside house he'd warm all corners in.
But who of his guests would greet his enemy now,
meet him face-to-face and ward off grisly death?
Diomedes killed the man and his aide-in-arms at once,
Axylus and Calesius who always drove his teamboth at a stroke he drove beneath the earth.
Euryalus killed Dresus, killed Opheltius,
turned and went for Pedasus and Aesepus, twins
the nymph of the spring Abarbarea bore Bucolion ...
Bucolion, son himself to the lofty King Laomedon,
first of the line, though his mother bore the prince
in secrecy and shadow. Tending his flocks one day
Bucolion took the nymph in a strong surge of love
and beneath his force she bore him twin sons.
But now the son of Mecisteus hacked the force
from beneath them both and loosed their gleaming limbs
and tore the armor off the dead men's shoulders.
Polypoetes braced for battle killed AstyalusWinging his bronze spear Odysseus slew Pidytes
bred in Percote, and Teucer did the same
for the royal AretaonAblerus went down too,
under the flashing lance of Nestor's son Antilochus,
and Slatus under the lord of men Agamemnon's strengthBlatus lived by the banks of rippling Satniois,
in Pedasus perched on cliffsThe hero Leitus
ran Phylacus down to ground at a dead run
and Eurypylus killed Melanthius outrightBut Menelaus
lord of the war cry had caught Adrestus alive.
Rearing, bolting in terror down the plain
his horses snared themselves in tamarisk branches.

/12-39/

20

30

40

{39-691

BOOK 6:


splintered his curved chariot just at the pole's tip
and breaking free they made a dash for the city walls
where battle-teams by the drove stampeded back in panic.
But their master hurled from the chariot, tumbling over the wheel
and pitching facedown in the dust, and above him now
rose Menelaus, his spear's long shadow looming.
Adrestus hugged his knees and begged him, pleading,
"Take me alive, Atrides, take a ransom worth my life!
Treasures are piled up in my rich father's house,
bronze and gold and plenty of well-wrought ironfather would give you anything, gladly, priceless ransom
if only he learns I'm still alive in Argive ships!"
His pleas were moving the heart in Menelaus,
just at the point of handing him to an aide
to take him back to the fast Achaean ships . . .
when up rushed Agamemnon, blocking his way
and shouting out, "So soft, dear brother, why?
Why such concern for enemies? I suppose you got
such tender loving care at home from the Trojans.
Ab would to god not one of them could escape
his sudden plunging death beneath our hands!
No baby boy still in his mother's belly,
not even he escape-all Ilium blotted out,
no tears for their lives, no markers for their graves!"
And the iron warrior brought his brother roundrough justice, fitting too.
Menelaus shoved Adrestus back with a fist,
powerful Agamemnon stabbed him in the flank
and back on his side the fighter went, faceup.
The son of Atreus dug a heel in his heaving chest
and wrenched the ash spear out.
And here came Nestor
with orders ringing down the field: "My comradesfighting Danaans, aides of Ares-no plunder now!
Don't lag behind, don't fling yourself at spoils
just to haul the biggest portion back to your ship.

197

50

60

70

80

198

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

{70-/00{

Now's the time for killing! Later, at leisure,
strip the corpses up and down the plain!"
So he ordered, spurring each man's nerveand the next moment crowds of Trojans once again
would have clambered back inside their city walls,
terror-struck by the Argives primed for battle.
But Helenus son of Priam, best of the seers
who scan the flight of birds, came striding up
to Aeneas and Hector, calling out, "My captains!
You bear the brunt of Troy's and Lycia's fightingyou are our bravest men, whatever the enterprise,
pitched battle itself or planning our campaigns,
so stand your ground right here!
Go through the ranks and rally all the troops.
Hold back our retreating mobs outside the gates
before they throw themselves in their women's arms in fear,
a great joy to our enemies closing for the kill.
And once you've roused our lines to the last man,
we'll hold out here and fight the Argives down,
hard-hit as we are-necessity drives us on.
But you,
Hector, you go back to the city, tell our mother
to gather all the older noble women together
in gray-eyed Athena's shrine on the city's crest,
unlock the doors of the goddess' sacred chamberand take a robe, the largest, loveliest robe
that she can find throughout the royal halls,
a gift that far and away she prizes most herself,
and spread it out across the sleek-haired goddess' knees.
Then promise to sacrifice twelve heifers in her shrine,
yearlings never broken, if only she'll pity Troy,
the Trojan wives and all our helpless children,
if only she'll hold Diomedes back from the holy citythat wild spearman, that invincible headlong terror!
He is the strongest Argive now, I tell you.
Never once did we fear Achilles so,
captain of armies, born of a goddess too,

90

100

110

tioo- 31]

BOOK 6:


or SO they say. But here's a maniac run amokno one can match his fury man-to-man!"
So he urged
and Hector obeyed his brother start to finish.
Down he leapt from his chariot fully armed, hit the ground
and brandishing two sharp spears went striding down his lines,
ranging flank to flank, driving his fighters into battle.
rousing grisly war-and round the Trojans whirled,
bracing to meet the Argives face-to-face.
And the Argives gave way, they quit the slaughterthey thought some god swept down from the starry skies
to back the Trojans now, they wheeled and rallied so.
Hector shouted out to his men in a piercing voice,
"Gallant-hearted Trojans and far-famed allies!
Now be men, my friends, call up your battle-fury!
Till I can return to Troy and tell them all,
the old counselors, all our wives, to pray to the gods
and vow to offer them many splendid victims."

And now,
when Hector reached the Scaean Gates and the great oak,
the wives and daughters of Troy came rushing up around him,
asking about their sons, brothers, friends and husbands.
But Hector told them only, "Pray to the gods"all the Trojan women, one after another . . .
Hard sorrows were hanging over many.
And soon
he came to Prlam's palace, that magnificent structure
built wide with porches and colonnades of polished stone.
And deep within its walls were fifty sleeping chambers
masoned in smooth, lustrous ashlar, linked in a line

203

260

270

280

290

204

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

where the sons of Priam slept beside their wedded wives,
and facing these, opening out across the inner courtyard,
lay the twelve sleeping chambers of Priam's daughters,
masoned and roofed in lustrous ashlar, linked in a line
where the sons-in-law of Priam slept beside their wives.
And there at the palace Hector's mother met her son,
that warm, goodhearted woman, going in with Laodice,
the loveliest daughter Hecuba ever bred. His mother
clutched his hand and urged him, called his name:
"My child-why have you left the bitter fighting,
why have you come home? Look how they wear you out,
the sons of Achaea-curse them-battling round our walls!
And that's why your spirit brought you back to Troy,
to climb the heights and stretch your arms to Zeus.
But wait, I'll bring you some honeyed, mellow wine.
First pour out cups to Father Zeus and the other gods,
then refresh yourself, if you'd like to quench your thirst.
When a man's exhausted, wine will build his strengthbattle-weary as you are, fighting for your people."
But Hector shook his head, his helmet flashing:
"Don't offer me mellow wine, mother, not nowyou'd sap my limbs, I'd lose my nerve for war.
And I'd be ashamed to pour a glistening cup to Zeus
with unwashed hands. I'm splattered with blood and filthhow could I pray to the lord of storm and lightning?
No, mother, you are the one to pray.
Go to Athena's shrine, the queen of plunder.
go with offerings, gather the older noble women
and take a robe, the largest, loveliest robe
that you can find throughout the royal halls.
a gift that far and away you prize most yourself,
and spread it out across the sleek-hatred goddess' knees.
Then promise to sacrifice twelve heifers in her shrine,
yearlings never broken, if only she'll pity Troy.
the Trojan wives and all our helpless children.
if only she'll hold Dlornedes back from the holy citythat wild spearman, that invincible headlong terror I

{Z45-78J

300

310

320

(279-310/

BOOK 6:


Now, mother, go to the queen of plunder's shrine
and I'll go hunt for Paris, summon him to fight
if the man will hear what I have to say ...
Let the earth gape and swallow him on the spot!
A great curse Olympian Zeus let live and grow in him,
for Troy and high-hearted Priam and all his sons.
That man-if I could see him bound for the House of Death,
I could say my heart had forgot its wrenching griefl"
But his mother simply turned away to the palace.
She gave her servants orders and out they strode
to gather the older noble women through the city.
Hecuba went down to a storeroom filled with scent
and there they were, brocaded, beautiful robes ...
the work of Sidonian women. Magnificent Paris
brought those women back himself from Sidon,
sailing the open seas on the same long voyage
he swept Helen off, her famous Father's child.
Lifting one from the lot, Hecuba brought it out
for great Athena's gift, the largest, loveliest,
richly worked, and like a star it glistened,
deep beneath the others. Then she made her way
with a file of noble women rushing in her train.
Once they reached Athena's shrine on the city crest
the beauty Theano opened the doors to let them in,
Cisseus' daughter, the horseman Antenor's wife
and Athena's priestess chosen by the Trojans. Thenwith a shrill wail they all stretched their arms to Athena
as Theano, her face radiant, lifting the robe on high,
spread it out across the sleek-haired goddess' knees
and prayed to the daughter of mighty Father Zeus:
"Queen Athena-shield of our city-glory of goddesses!
Now shatter the spear of Diomedes! That wild manhurl him headlong down before the Scaean Gates!
At once we'll sacrifice twelve heifers in your shrine,
yearlings never broken, if only YOU'll pity Troy,
the Trojan wives and all our helpless children!"

205
330

340

350

360

206

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

1311-38/

But Athena refused to hear Theano's prayers.
And while they prayed to the daughter of mighty Zeus
Hector approached the halls of Paris, sumptuous halls
he built himself with the finest masons of the day,
master builders famed in the fertile land of Troy.
370
They'd raised his sleeping chamber, house and court
adjoining Priarn's and Hector's aloft the city heights.
Now Hector, dear to Zeus, strode through the gates,
clutching a thrusting-lance eleven forearms long;
the bronze tip of the weapon shone before him,
ringed with a golden hoop to grip the shaft.
And there in the bedroom Hector came on Paris
polishing, fondling his splendid battle-gear,
his shield and breastplate, turning over and over
his long curved bow. And there was Helen of Argas,
380
sitting with all the women of the house, directing
the rich embroidered work they had in hand.
Seeing Paris,
Hector raked his brother with insults, stinging taunts:
"What on earth are you doing? Oh how wrong it is,
this anger you keep smoldering in your heart! Look,
your people dying around the city, the steep walls,
dying in arms-and all for you, the battle cries
and the fighting flaring up around the citadel.
You'd be the first to lash out at another-anywhereyou saw hanging back from this, this hateful war.
390
Up with youbefore all Troy is torched to a cinder here and now!"
And Paris, magnificent as a god, replied,
"Ah Hector, you criticize me fairly, yes,
nothing unfair, beyond what I deserve. And so
I will try to tell you something. Please bear with me,
hear me out. It's not so much from anger or outrage
at our people that I keep to my rooms so long.
I only wanted to plunge myself in grief.
But just now my wife was bringing me round,
her winning words urging me back to battle.

400

{338-66]

BOOK 6:


And it strikes me, even me, as the better way.
Victory shifts, you know, now one man, now another.
So come, wait while I get this war-gear on,
or you go on ahead and I will followI think I can overtake you."
Hector, helmet flashing,
answered nothing. And Helen spoke to him now,
her soft voice welling up: "My dear brother,
dear to me, bitch that I am, vicious, scheminghorror to freeze the heart! Oh how I wish
that first day my mother brought me into the light
some black whirlwind had rushed me out to the mountains
or into the surf where the roaring breakers crash and drag
and the waves had swept me off before all this had happened!
But since the gods ordained it all, these desperate years,
I wish I had been the wife of a better man, someone
alive to outrage, the withering scorn of men.
This one has no steadiness in his spirit,
not now, he never will ...
and he's going to reap the fruits of it, I swear.
But come in, rest on this seat with me, dear brother.
You are the one hit hardest by the fighting, Hector,
you more than all-and all for me, whore that I am,
and this blind mad Paris. Oh the two of us!
Zeus planted a killing doom within us both,
so even for generations still unborn
we will live in song."
Turning to go,
his helmet flashing, tall Hector answered,
"Don't ask me to sit beside you here, Helen.
Love me as you do, you can't persuade me now.
No time for rest. My heart races to help our Trojansthey long for me, sorely, whenever I am gone.
But rouse this fellow, won't you?
And let him hurry himself along as well,
so he can overtake me before I leave the city.
For I must go home to see my people first,
to visit my own dear wife and my baby son.

207

410

420

430

208

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

Who knows if I will ever come back to them again?or the deathless gods will strike me down at last
at the hands of Argive fighters."
A flash of his helmet
and off he strode and quickly reached his sturdy,
well-built house. But white-armed Andromache-Hector could not find her in the halls.
She and the boy and a servant finely gowned
were standing watch on the tower, sobbing, grieving.
When Hector saw no sign of his loyal wife inside
he went to the doorway, stopped and asked the servants,
"Come, please, tell me the truth now, women.
Where's Andromache gone? To my sisters' house?
To my brothers' wives with their long flowing robes?
Or Athena's shrine where the noble Trojan women
gather to win the great grim goddess over?"

/J67-99/

440

450

A busy, willing servant answered quickly,
"Hector, seeing you want to know the truth,
she hasn't gone to your sisters, brothers' wives
or Athena's shrine where the noble Trojan women
gather to win the great grim goddess over.
Up to the huge gate-tower of Troy she's gone
because she heard our men are so hard-pressed,
the Achaean fighters coming on in so much force.
She sped to the wall in panic, like a madwomanthe nurse went with her, carrying your child."
At that, Hector spun and rushed from his house,
back by the same way down the wide, well-paved streets
throughout the city until he reached the Scaean Gates,
the last point he would pass to gain the field of battle.
There his warm, generous wife came running up to meet him,
Andromache the daughter of gallant-hearted Eetion
who had lived below Mount Placos rich with timber,
in Thebe below the peaks, and ruled Cilida's people.
His daughter had married Hector helmed in bronze.
She joined him now, and following in her steps

470

/399-428/

BOOK 6:


a servant holding the boy against her breast,
in the first flush of life, only a baby,
Hector's son, the darling of his eyes
and radiant as a star ...
Hector would always call the boy Scarnandrius,
townsmen called him Astyanax. Lord of the City,
since Hector was the lone defense of Troy.
The great man of war breaking into a broad smile,
his gaze fixed on his son, in silence. Andromache,
pressing close beside him and weeping freely now,
clung to his hand, urged him, called him: "Reckless one,
my Hector-your own fiery courage will destroy you!
Have you no pity for him, our helpless son? Or me,
and the destiny that weighs me down, your widow,
now so soon? Yes, soon they will kill you off,
all the Achaean forces massed for assault, and then,
bereft of you, better for me to sink beneath the earth.
What other warmth, what comfort's left for me,
once you have met your doom? Nothing but torment!
I have lost my father. Mother's gone as well.
Father .., the brilliant Achilles laid him low
when he stormed Cilicia's city filled With people,
Thebe with her towering gates. He killed Betion,
not that he stripped his gear-he'd some respect at leastfor he burned his corpse in all his blazoned bronze,
then heaped a grave-mound high above the ashes
and nymphs of the mountain planted elms around it,
daughters of Zeus whose shield is storm and thunder.
And the seven brothers I had within our halls . . .
all in the same day went down to the House of Death,
the great godlike runner Achilles butchered them all,
tending their shambling oxen, shining flocks.
And mother,
who ruled under the timberline of woody Piacos oncehe no sooner haled her here with his other plunder
than he took a priceless ransom, set her free
and home she went to her father's royal halls
where Arternis, showering arrows, shot her down.

209

480

490

500

210

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

You, Hector-you are my father now, my noble mother,
a brother too, and you are my husband, young and warm
and strong!
Pity me, please! Take your stand on the rampan here,
before you orphan your son and make your wife a widow.
Draw your armies up where the wild fig tree stands.
there, where the city lies most open to assault.
the walls lower, easily overrun. Three times
they have tried that point, hoping to storm Troy.
their best fighters led by the Great and Little Ajax,
famous Idomeneus. Atreus' sons, valiant Diomedes.
Perhaps a skilled prophet revealed the spotor their own fury whips them on to attack."
And tall Hector nodded, his helmet flashing:
..All this weighs on my mind too, dear woman.
But I would die of shame to face the men of Troy
and the Trojan women trailing their long robes
if I would shrink from battle now, a coward.
Nor does the spirit urge me on that way.
I've learned it all too well. To stand up bravely,
always to fight in the front ranks of Trojan soldiers.
winning my father great glory, glory for myself.
For in my hean and soul I also know this well:
the day will come when sacred Troy must die,
Priam must die and all his people with him.
Priam who hurls the strong ash spear . . .
Even so.
it is less the pain of the Trojans still to come
that weighs me down, not even of Hecuba herself
or King Priam, or the thought that my own brothers
in all their numbers, all their gallant courage.
may tumble in the dust, crushed by enemiesThat is nothing, nothing beside your agony
when some brazen Argive hales you off in tears.
wrenching away your day of light and freedom!
Then far off in the land of Argos you must live,
laboring at a loom, at another woman's beck and call,

(429-56/

510

520

530

540

(457-85)

BOOK 6:


fetching water at some spring, Messeis or Hyperia,
resisting it all the waythe rough yoke of necessity at your neck.
And a man may say, who sees you streaming tears,
'There is the wife of Hector, the bravest fighter
they could field, those stallion-breaking Trojans,
long ago when the men fought for Troy.' So he will say
and the fresh grief will swell your heart once more,
widowed, robbed of the one man strong enough
to fight off your day of slavery.
No, no,
let the earth come piling over my dead body
before I hear your cries. I hear you dragged away!"
In the same breath, shining Hector reached down
for his son-but the boy recoiled,
cringing against his nurse's full breast,
screaming out at the sight of his own father,
terrified by the flashing bronze, the horsehair crest,
the great ridge of the helmet nodding, bristling terrorso it struck his eyes. And his loving father laughed,
his mother laughed as well, and glorious Hector,
quickly lifting the helmet from his head,
set it down on the ground, fiery in the sunlight,
and raising his son he kissed him, tossed him in his arms,
lifting a prayer to Zeus and the other deathless gods:
"Zeus, all you immortals! Grant this boy, my son,
may be like me, first in glory among the Trojans,
strong and brave like me, and rule all Troy in power
and one day let them say, 'He is a better man than his fatherl'when he comes home from battle bearing the bloody gear
of the mortal enemy he has killed in wara joy to his mother's heart:'
So Hector prayed
and placed his son in the arms of his loving wife.
Andromache pressed the child to her scented breast,
smiling through her tears. Her husband noticed,
and filled with pity now, Hector stroked her gently,

211

550

560

570

212

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

[485-516[

trying to reassure her, repeating her name: "Andromache.
dear one, why so desperate? Why so much grief for me?
No man will hurl me down to Death, against my fate.
And fate? No one alive has ever escaped it,
neither brave man nor coward, I tell youit's born with us the day that we are born.
So please go home and tend to your own tasks,
the distaff and the loom, and keep the women
working hard as well. As for the fighting,
men will see to that, all who were born in Troy
but I most of all."
Hector aflash in arms
took up his horsehair-crested helmet once again.
And his loving wife went home, turning, glancing
back again and again and weeping live warm tears.
She quickly reached the sturdy house of Hector,
man-killing Hector,
•
and found her women gathered there inside
and stirred them all to a high pitch of mourning.
So in his house they raised the dirges for the dead,
for Hector still alive, his people were so convinced
that never again would he come home from battle,
never escape the Argives' rage and bloody hands.
Nor did Paris linger long in his vaulted halls.
Soon as he buckled on his elegant gleaming bronze
he rushed through Troy, sure in his racing stride.
As a stallion full-fed at the manger, stalled too long,
breaking free of his tether gallops down the plain,
out for his favorite plunge in a river's cool currents,
thundering in his pride-his head flung back, his mane
streaming over his shoulders, sure and sleek in his glory.
knees racing him on to the fields and stallion-haunts he lovesso down from Pergamus heights came Paris, son of Pnam,
, glittering in his armor like the sun astride the skies,
exultant, laughing aloud, his fast feet sped him on.
Quickly he overtook his brother, noble Hector
still lingering, slow to turn from the spot

580

590

600

610

/516-291

BOOK 6:


213

where he had just confided in his wife . . .
Magnificent Paris spoke first: "Dear brother,
look at me, holding you back in all your speeddragging my feet, coming to you so late,
and you told me to be quick!"
A flash of his helmet as Hector shot back,
"Impossible man! How could anyone fair and just
underrate your work in battle? You're a good soldier.
But you hang back of your own accord, refuse to fight.
And that, that's why the heart inside me aches
when I hear our Trojans heap contempt on you,
the men who bear such struggles all for you.
Come,
now for attack! We'll set all this to rights,
someday, if Zeus will ever let us raise
the winebowl of freedom high in our halls,
high to the gods of cloud and sky who live foreveronce we drive these Argives geared for battle out of Troy!"

BOOK

NINE

So the Trojans held their watch that night but not the Achaeansgodsent Panic seized them, comrade of bloodcurdling Rout:
all their best were struck by grief too much to bear.
As crosswinds chop the sea where the fish swarm,
the North Wind and the West Wind blasting out of Thrace
in sudden, lightning attack, wave on blacker wave, cresting,
heaving a tangled mass of seaweed out along the surfso the Achaeans' hearts were tom inside their chests.
Distraught with the rising anguish, Atreus' son
went ranging back and forth, commanding heralds
to sound out loud and clear and call the men to muster,
each by name, but no loud outcry now. The king himself
pitched in with the lead heralds, summoning troops.
They grouped on the meeting grounds, morale broken.

10

251

252

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

{lJ-44j

Lord marshal Agamemnon rose up in their midst,
streaming tears like a dark spring running down
some desolate rock face, its shaded currents flowing.
So, with a deep groan, the king addressed his armies:
"Friends .., lords of the Argives, all my captainsl
.Cronus' son has entangled me in madness, blinding ruinZeus is a harsh, cruel god. He vowed to me long ago,
he bowed his head that I should never embark for home
till I had brought the walls of Ilium crashing down.
But now, I see, he only plotted brutal treachery:
now he commands me back to Argos in disgrace,
whole regiments of my men destroyed in battle.
So it must please his overweening heart, who knows?
Father Zeus has lopped the crowns of a thousand cities,
true, and Zeus will lop still more-his power is too great.
So come, follow my orders. Obey me, all you Argives.
Cut and run! Sail home to the fatherland we love!
We'll never take the broad streets of Troy."
Silence held them all, struck dumb by his orders.
A long while they said nothing, spirits dashed.
Finally Diomedes lord of the war cry broke forth:
"Atrides-I will be first to oppose you in your folly,
here in assembly, King, where it's the custom.
Spare me your anger. My couragemine was the first you mocked among the Argives.
branding me a coward, a poor soldier. Yes, well,
they know all about that, the Argives young and old.
But you-the son of Cronus with Cronus' twisting ways
gave you gifts by halves: with that royal scepter
the Father gave you honor beyond all other men alive
but he never gave you courage, the greatest power of all.
Desperate man! So certain, are you, the sons of Achaea
are cowards, poor soldiers, just because you say so?
Desert-if your spirit drives you to sail home,
then 'ail away, my King! The sea-lanes are clear,
there are your ships of war, crowded down the surf,
those that followed you from Mycenae, your own proud armada.

20

30

40

50

[45-75J

BOOK 9:

253

But the rest of the long-hatred Achaeans will hold out,
right here, until we've plundered Troy. And they,
if they go running home to the land they love,
then the two of us, I and Sthenelus here
will fight our way to the fixed doom of Troy.
Never forget-we all sailed here with god."
And all the Achaeans shouted their assent,
stirred by the stallion-breaking Diomedes' challenge.
But Nestor the old driver rose and spoke at once:
"Few can match your power in battle, Diomedes,
and in council you excel all men your age.
So no one could make light of your proposals,
not the whole army-who could contradict you?
But you don't press on and reach a useful end.
How young you are .., why, you could be my son,
my youngest-born at that, though you urge our kings
with cool clear sense: what you've said is right.
But it's my turn now, Diomedes,
I think I can claim to have some years on you.
So I must speak up and drive the matter home.
And no one will heap contempt on what I say,
not even mighty Agamemnon. Lost to the clan,
lost to the hearth, lost to the old ways, that one
who lusts for all the horrors of war with his own people.
But now, I say, let us give way to the dark night,
set out the evening meal. Sentries take up posts,
squads fronting the trench we dug outside the rampart.
That's the command I give the younger fighters.
Then,
Atrides, lead the way-you are the greatest kingspread out a feast for all your senior chiefs.
That is your duty, a service that becomes you.
Your shelters overflow with the wine Achaean ships
bring in from Thrace, daily, down the sea's broad back.
Grand hospitality is yours, you rule so many men.
Come, gather us all and we will heed that man
who gives the best advice. That's what they need,

60

70

80

254

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

I tell you-all the Achaeans-good sound advice,
now our enemies, camping hard against the ships,
kindle their watchfires round us by the thousands.
What soldier could warm to that? Tonight's the night
that rips our ranks to shreds or pulls us through."
The troops hung on his words and took his orders.
Out they rushed, the sentries in armor, forming
under the son of Nestor, captain Thrasymedes,
under.Ascalaphus, Ialmenus, sons of Ares,
under Meriones, Aphareus and Deipyrus,
under the son of Creon, trusty Lycomedes.
Seven chiefs of the guard, a hundred under each,
fighters marching, grasping long spears in their hands,
took up new positions between the trench and rampart.
There they lit their fires, each man made his meal.
Meanwhile marshal Agamemnon led his commanders,
a file of senior chiefs, toward his own lodge
and set before [hem a feast to please their hearts.
They reached out for the good things that lay at hand
but when they had put aside desire for food and drink
the old man began to weave his counsel among them:
Nestor was first to speak-from the early days
his plans and tactics always seemed the best.
With good will to the chiefs he rose and spoke,
"Great marshal Atrides, lord of men Agamemnon ...
with you I will end, my King, with you I will begin,
since you hold sway over many warriors, vast armies,
and Zeus has placed in your hands the royal scepter
and time-honored laws, so you will advise them well.
So you above all must speak your mind, and listen,
and carry out the next man's counsel too,
whenever his spirit leads him on to speak
for the public good. Credit will go to you
for whatever he proposes.
Now I will tell you what seems best to me.
No one will offer a better plan than this ...

f75-I04/

90

100

110

120

[105-32/

BOOK 9:



the plan I still retain, and I've been forming,
well, for a good long while now, from the very day
that you, my illustrious King, infuriated Achillesyou went and took from his tents the girl Briseis.
and not with any applause from us, far from it:
I for one, I urged you against it, strenuously.
But you, you gave way to your overbearing anger,
disgraced a great man the gods themselves esteemyou seized his gift of honor and keep her still.
But even so, late as it is, let us contrive
to set all this to rights, to bring him round
with gifts of friendship and warm, winning words."
And Agamemnon the lord of men consented quickly:
"That's no lie, old man-a full account you give
of all my acts of madness. Mad, blind I was!
Not even I would deny it.
Why look, that man is worth an entire army,
the fighter Zeus holds dear with all his hearthow he exalts him now and mauls Achaea's forcesl
But since I was blinded, lost in my own inhuman rage,
now, at last, I am bent on setting things to rights:
I'll give a priceless ransom paid for friendship.
Here,
before you all, I'll name in full the splendid gifts I offer.
Seven tripods never touched by fire, ten bars of gold,
twenty burnished cauldrons, a dozen massive stallions,
racers who earned me trophies with their speed.
He is no poor man who owns what they have won,
not strapped for goods with all that lovely goldwhat trophies those high-strung horses carried off for me!
Seven women I'll give him, flawless, skilled in crafts,
women of Lesbos-the ones I chose, my privilege.
that day he captured the Lesbos citadel himself:
they outclassed the tribes of women in their beauty.
These I will give, and along with them will go
the one I took away at first, Briseus' daughter.
and I will swear a solemn, binding oath in the bargain:

255

130

140

150

256

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

I never mounted her bed, never once made love with herthe natural thing for mankind, men and women joined.
Now all these gifts will be handed him at once.
But if, later, the gods allow us to plunder
the great city of Priam, let him enter in
when we share the spoils, load the holds of his ship
with gold and bronze-as much as his heart desiresand choose for his pleasure twenty Trojan women
second only to Argive Helen in their glory.
And then, if we can journey home to Achaean Argos,
pride of the breasting earth, he'll be my son-by-marriagel
I will even honor him on a par with my Orestes,
full-grown by now, reared in the lap of luxury.
Three daughters are mine in my well-built hallsChrysothemis and Laodice and Iphianassaand he may lead away whichever one he likes,
with no bride-price asked, home to Peleus' house.
And I will add a dowry, yes, a magnificent treasure
the likes of which no man has ever offered with his daughter I
Seven citadels I will give him, filled with people,
Cardamyle, Enope, and the grassy slopes of Hire,
Pherae the sacrosanct, Anthea deep in meadows,
rolling Aepea and Pedasus green with vineyards.
All face the sea at the far edge of sandy Pylos
and the men who live within them, rich in sheep-flocks,
rich in shambling cattle, will honor him like a god
with hoards of gifts and beneath his scepter's sway
live out his laws in sleek and shining peace.
All thisI would extend to him if he will end his anger.
Let him submit to me! Only the god of death
is so relentless, Death submits to no oneso mortals hate him most of all the gods.
Let him bow down to me! I am the greater king,
I am the elder-born, I claim-the greater man."
Nestor the noble charioteer embraced his offer:
"Generous marshal Atrides, lord of men Agamemnon!

/I3J-631
160

170

180

190

1164-921

BOOK 9:



No one could underrate these gifts of yours, not now,
the treasure trove you offer Prince Achilles.
Come-we'll send a detail of picked men.
They'll go to Achilles' tent with all good speed.
Quick, whomever my eye will light on in review,
the mission's theirs. And old Phoenix firstZeus loves the man, so let him lead the way.
Then giant Ajax and tactful royal Odysseus.
Heralds? Odius and Eurybates, you escort them.
Water for their hands! A reverent silence now ...
a prayer to Zeus. Perhaps he'll show us mercy."
The brisk commands he issued pleased them all.
Heralds brought the water at once and rinsed their hands,
and the young men brimmed the mixing bowls with wine
and tipping first drops for the god in every cup
they poured full rounds for all. Libations finished,
each envoy having drunk to his heart's content,
the party moved out from Atrides' shelters.
Nestor the old driver gave them marching orders-a sharp glance at each, Odysseus most of all:
"Try hard now, bring him round-invincible Achilles!"
So Ajax and Odysseus made their way at once
where the battle lines of breakers crash and drag,
praying hard to the god who moves and shakes the earth
that they might bring the proud heart of Achilles
round with speed and ease.
Reaching the Myrmidon shelters and their ships,
they found him there, delighting his heart now,
plucking strong and clear on the fine lyrebeautifully carved, its silver bridge set firrnhe won from the spoils when he razed Eetion's city.
Achilles was lifting his spirits with it now,
singing the famous deeds of fighting heroes ...
Across from him Patroclus sat alone, in silence,
waiting for Aeacus' son to finish with his song.
And on they came, with good Odysseus in the lead,

257

200

210

220

230

258

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

[1 93-223[

and the envoys stood before him. Achilles, startled,
sprang to his feet, the lyre still in his hands,
leaving the seat where he had sat in peace.
And seeing the men, Patroclus rose up too
as the famous runner called and waved them on:
"Welcome! Look, dear friends have come our wayI must be sorely needed now-my dearest friends
in all the Achaean armies, even in my anger."
So Prince Achilles hailed and led them in,
sat them down on settles with purple carpets
and quickly told Patroclus standing by, "Come,
a bigger winebowl, son of Menoetius, set it here.
Mix stronger wine. A cup for the hands of each guesthere beneath my roof are the men I love the most:'
He paused. Patroclus obeyed his great friend,
who put down a heavy chopping block in the firelight
and across it laid a sheep's chine, a fat goat's
and the long back cut of a full-grown pig,
marbled with lard. Automedon held the meats
while lordly Achilles carved them into quarters.
cut them well into pieces, pierced them with spits
and Patroclus raked the hearth, a man like a god
making the fire blaze. Once it had burned down
and the flames died away, he scattered the coals
and stretching the spitted meats across the embers,
raised them onto supports and sprinkled clean pure salt.
As soon as the roasts were done and spread on platters,
Patroclus brought the bread, set it out on the board
in ample wicker baskets. Achilles served the meat.
Then face-to-face with his noble guest Odysseus
he took his seat along the farther wall,
he told his friend to sacrifice to the gods
and Patroclus threw the first cuts in the fire.
They reached out for the good things that lay at hand
and when they had put aside desire for food and drink,
Ajax nodded to Phoenix. Odysseus caught the signal,

240

250

260

/224-50}

BOOK 9:



filled his cup and lifted it toward Achilles,
opening with this toast: "Your health, Achilles!
We have no lack of a handsome feast, I see that,
either in Agamemnon's tents, the son of Atreus,
or here and now, in yours. We can all banquet here
to our heart's content.
But it's not the flowing feast
that is on our minds now-no, a stark disaster,
too much to bear, Achilles bred by the gods,
that is what we are staring in the face
and we are afraid. All hangs in the balance now:
whether we save our benched ships or they're destroyed,
unless, of course, you put your fighting power in harness.
They have pitched camp right at our ships and rampart,
those brazen Trojans, they and their far-famed allies,
thousands of fires blaze throughout their armies ...
Nothing can stop them now-that's their boastthey'll hurl themselves against our blackened huUs.
And the son of Cronus sends them signs on the right,
Zeus's firebolts flashing. And headlong Hector,
delirious with his strength, rages uncontrollably,
trusting to Zeus-no fear of man or god, nothinga powerful rabid frenzy has him in its grip!
Hector prays for the sacred Dawn to break at once,
he threatens to lop the high horns of our stems
and gut our ships with fire, and all our comrades
pinned against the hulls, panicked by thick smoke,
he'll rout and kill in blood!
A nightmare--I fear it, with all my heartI fear the gods will carry out his threats
and then it will be our fate to die in Troy,
far from the stallion-land of Argos ...
Up with younow, late as it is, if you want to pull our Argives,
our hard-hit armies, clear of the Trojan onslaught.
Fail us now? What a grief it will be to you
through all the years to come. No remedy,
no way to cure the damage once it's done.

259

270

280

290

300

260

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

{250-80{

Come, while there's still time, think hard:
how can you fight off the Argives' fatal day?
Oh old friend, surely your father Peleus urged you,
that day he sent you out of Phthia to Agamemnon.
'My son, victory is what Athena and Hera will give,
if they so choose. But you, you hold in check
that proud, fiery spirit of yours inside your chest!
Friendship is much better. Vicious quarrels are deadlyput an end to them, at once. Your Achaean comrades,
young and old, will exalt you all the more:
That was your aged father's parting advice.
It must have slipped your mind.
But now at last,
stop, Achilles-let your heart-devouring anger go!
The king will hand you gifts to match his insults
if only you'll relent and end your anger ...
So come then, listen, as I count out the gifts,
the troves in his tents that Agamemnon vows to give you.
Seven tripods never touched by fire, ten bars of gold,
twenty burnished cauldrons, a dozen massive stallions,
racers who earned him trophies with their speed.
He is no poor man who owns what they have won,
not strapped for goods with all that lovely goldwhat trophies those high-strung horses carried off for him!
Seven women he'll give you, flawless, skilled in crafts,
women of Lesbos-the ones he chose, his privilege,
that day you captured the Lesbos citadel yourself:
they outclassed the tribes of women in their beauty.
These he will give, and along with them will go
the one he took away at first, Briseus' daughter,
and he will swear a solemn, binding oath in the bargain:
he never mounted her bed, never once made love with her ...
the natural thing, my lord, men and women joined.
Now all these gifts will be handed you at once.
But if, later, the gods allow us to plunder
the great city of Priarn, you shall enter in
when we share the spoils, load the holds of your ship
with gold and bronze-as much as your heart desires-

}IO

}20

}}O

}40

f281 -3111

BOOK 9:



and choose for your pleasure twenty Trojan women
second only to Argive Helen in their glory.
And then, if we can journey home to Achaean Argos,
pride of the breasting earth, you'll be his son-by-marriage ...
He will even honor you on a par with his Orestes,
full-grown by now, reared in the lap of luxury.
Three daughters are his in his well-built halls,
Chrysothemis and Laodice and Iphianassaand you may lead away whichever one you like,
with no bride-price asked, home to Peleus' house.
And he will add a dowry, yes, a magnificent treasure
the likes of which no man has ever offered with his daughter . . .
Seven citadels he will give you, filled with people,
Cardamyle, Bnope, and the grassy slopes of Hire,
Pherae the sacrosanct, Anthea deep in meadows,
rolling Aepea and Pedasus green with vineyards.
All face the sea at the far edge of sandy Pylos
and the men who live within them, rich in sheep-flocks,
rich in shambling cattle, will honor you like a god
with hoards of gifts and beneath your scepter's sway
live out your laws in sleek and shining peace.
All this ...
he would extend to you if you will end your anger.
But if you hate the son of Atreus all the more,
him and his troves of gifts, at least take pity
on all our united forces mauled in battle here-they will honor you, honor you like a god.
Think of the glory you will gather in their eyes!
Now you can kill Hector-seized with murderous frenzy,
certain there's not a single fighter his equal.
no Achaean brought to Troy in the shipsnow, for once, you can meet the man head-on!"
The famous runner Achilles rose to his challenge:
"Royal son of Laertes. Odysseus, great tactician ...
I must say what I have to say straight out,
must tell you how I feel and how all this will endso you won't crowd around me, one after another,

261

350

360

370

262

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

coaxing like a murmuring clutch of doves.
I hate that man like the very Gates of Death
who says one thing but hides another in his heart.
I will say it outright. That seems best to me.
Will Agamemnon win me over? Not for all the world,
nor will all the rest of Achaea's armies.
No, what lasting thanks in the long run
for warring with our enemies, on and on, no end?
One and the same lot for the man who hangs back
and the man who battles hard. The same honor waits
for the coward and the brave. They both go down to Death,
the fighter who shirks, the one who works to exhaustion.
And what's laid up for me, what pittance? Nothingand after suffering hardships, year in, year out,
staking my life on the mortal risks of war.

{JII-J9]

380

390

Like a mother bird hurrying morsels back
to her unfledged young-whatever she can catch-

but it's all starvation wages for herself.
So for me.
Many a sleepless night I've bivouacked in harness,
day after bloody day I've hacked my passage through,
fighting other soldiers to win their wives as prizes.
Twelve cities of men I've stormed and sacked from shipboard,
eleven I claim by land, on the fertile earth of Troy.
And from all I dragged off piles of splendid plunder,
hauled it away and always gave the lot to Agamemnon.
that son of Atreus-always skulking behind the lines,
safe in his fast ships-and he would take it all.
he'd parcel out some scraps but keep the lion's share.
Some he'd hand to the lords and kings-prizes of honorand they, they hold them stilI. From me alone, Achilles
of all Achaeans, he seizes, he keeps the bride I love ...
Well let him bed her nowenjoy her to the hilt!
Why must we battle Trojans,
men of Argas? Why did he muster an army, lead us here,
that son of Atreus? Why, why in the world if not

400

410

/339-67/

BOOK 9:



for Helen with her loose and lustrous hair?
Are they the only men alive who love their wives,
those sons of Atreus? Never! Any decent man,
a man with sense, loves his own, cares for his own
as deeply as I. I loved that woman with all my heart,
though I won her like a trophy with my spear ...
But now that he's tom my honor from my hands,
robbed me, lied to me-don't let him try me now.
I know him too well-he'll never win me over!
No, Odysseus,
let him rack his brains with you and the other captains
how to fight the raging fire off the ships. Lookwhat a mighty piece of work he's done without me!
Why, he's erected a rampart, driven a trench around it,
broad, enormous, and planted stakes to guard it. No use!
He still can't block the power of man-killing Hector!
No, though as long as I fought on Achaea's lines
Hector had little lust to charge beyond his walls,
never ventured beyond the Scaean Gates and oak tree,
There he stood up to me alone one dayand barely escaped my onslaught.
Ab but now,
since I have no desire to battle glorious Hector,
tomorrow at daybreak, once I have sacrificed
to Zeus and all the gods and loaded up my holds
and launched out on the breakers-watch, my friend,
if you'll take the time and care to see me off,
and you will see my squadrons sail at dawn,
fanning out on the Hellespont that swarms with fish,
my crews manning the oarlocks, rowing out with a will,
and if the famed god of the earthquake grants us safe passage,
the third day out we raise the dark rich soil of Phthia.
There lies my wealth, hoards of it, all I left behind
when I sailed to Troy on this, this insane voyageand still more hoards from here: gold, ruddy bronze,
women sashed and lovely, and gleaming gray iron,
and I will haul it home, all I won as plunder.
All but my prize of honor ...

263

420

430

440

264

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

{367-94{

he who gave that prize has snatched it back againwhat outrage! That high and mighty King Agamemnon,
that son of Atreus!
450
Go back and tell him all,
all I say-out in the open too-so other Achaeans
can wheel on him in anger if he still hopeswho knows?-to deceive some other comrade.
Shameless,
inveterate-armored in shamelessness! Dog that he is,
he'd never dare to look me straight in the eyes again.
No, I'll never set heads together with that manno planning in common, no taking common action.
He cheated me, did me damage, wrong! But never again,
he'll never rob me blind with his twisting words again!
460
Once is enough for him. Die and be damned for all I care!
Zeus who rules the world has ripped his wits away.
His gifts, I loathe his gifts . . .
I wouldn't give you a splinter for that manl
Not if he gave me ten times as much, twenty times over, all
he possesses now, and all that could pour in from the world's end-not all the wealth that's freighted into Orchomenos, even into Thebes,
Egyptian Thebes where the houses overflow with the greatest troves
of treasure,
Thebes with the hundred gates and through each gate battalions,
two hundred fighters surge to war with teams and chariotsno, not if his gifts outnumbered all the grains of sand
470
and dust in the earth-no, not even then could Agamemnon
bring my fighting spirit round until he pays me back,
pays full measure for all his heartbreaking outrage!
His daughter ... I will marry no daughter of Agamemnon.
Not if she rivaled Aphrodite in all her golden glory,
not if she matched the crafts of dear-eyed Athena,
not even then would I make her my wife! No.
let her father pitch on some other Argiveone who can please him, a greater king than I.
If the gods pull me through and I reach home alive.
Peleus needs no help to fetch a bride for me himself.

480

{J95-426j

BOOK 9:



Plenty of Argive women wait in Hellas and in Phthia,
daughters of lords who rule their citadels in power.
Whomever I want I'll make my cherished wife-at home.
Time and again my fiery spirit drove me to win a wife,
a fine partner to please my heart, to enjoy with her
the treasures myoid father Peleus piled high.
I say no wealth is worth my life! Not all they claim
was stored in the depths of Troy, that city built on riches,
in the old days of peace before the sons of Achaea camenot all the gold held fast in the Archer's rocky vaults,
in Phoebus Apollo's house on Pytho's sheer cliffs!
Cattle and fat sheep can all be had for the raiding,
tripods all for the trading, and tawny-headed stallions.
But a man's life breath cannot come back againno raiders in force, no trading brings it back,
once it slips through a man's clenched teeth.
Mother tells me,
the immortal goddess Thetis with her glistening feet,
that two fates bear me on to the day of death.
If I hold out here and I lay siege to Troy,
my journey home is gone, but my glory never dies.
If I voyage back to the fatherland I love,
my pride, my glory dies ...
true, but the life that's left me will be long,
the stroke of death will not come on me quickly.
One thing more. To the rest I'd pass on this advice:
sail home now! You will never set your eyes
on the day of doom that topples looming Troy.
Thundering Zeus has spread his hands above herher armies have taken heart!
So you go back
to the great men of Achaea. You report my messagesince this is the privilege of senior chiefslet them work out a better plan of action,
use their imaginations now to save the ships
and Achaea's armies pressed to their hollow hulls.
This maneuver will never work for them, this scheme

265

490

500

510

266

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

they hatched for the moment as I raged on and on.
But Phoenix can stay and rest the night with us,
so he can voyage home, home in the ships with me
to the fatherland we love. Tomorrow at dawn.
But only if Phoenix wishes.
I will never force the man to go."
He stopped.
A stunned silence seized them all, struck dumbAchilles' ringing denials overwhelmed them so.
At last Phoenix the old charioteer spoke out,
he burst into tears, terrified for Achaeas fleet:
"Sail home? Is that what you're turning over in your mind,
my glorious one, Achilles? Have you no heart at all
to fight the gutting fire from the fast trim ships?
The spirit inside you overpowered by anger!
How could I be severed from you, dear boy,
left behind on the beachhead here-alone?
The old horseman Peleus had me escort you,
that day he sent you out of Phthia to Agamemnon,
a youngster still untrained for the great leveler, war,
still green at debate where men can make their mark.
So he dispatched me, to teach you all these things,
to make you a man of words and a man of action too.
Cut off from you with a charge like that, dear boy?
I have no heart to be left behind, not even
if Zeus himself would swear to scrape away
the scurf of age and make me young again ...
As fresh as I was that time I first set out
from HeIJas where the women are a wonder,
fleeing a blood feud with my father, Amyntor,
Ormenus' son. How furious father was with me,
over his mistress with her dark, glistening hair.
How he would dote on her and spurn his wedded wife,
my own mother! And time and again she begged me,
hugging my knees, to bed my father's mistress down
and kill the young girl's taste for an old man.
Mother-I did your bidding, did my work ...
But father, suspecting at once, cursed me roundly,

[426-54J

520

530

540

550

{454-88{

BOOK 9:



he screamed out to the cruel Furies-'Never,
never let me bounce on my knees a son of his,
sprung of his loins!'-and the gods drove home that curse,
mighty Zeus of the Underworld and grim Persephone.
So I, I took it into my head to lay him low
with sharp bronze! But a god checked my anger,
he warned me of what the whole realm would say,
the loose talk of the people, rough slurs of menthey must not call me a father-killer, our Achaeansl
Then nothing could keep me there, my blood so fired up.
No more strolling about the halls with father raging.
But there was a crowd of kin and cousins round me,
holding me in the house, begging me to stay ...
they butchered plenty of fat sheep, banquet fare,
and shambling crook-horned cattle, droves of pigs,
succulent, rich with fat-they singed the bristles,
splaying the porkers out across Hephaestus' fire,
then wine from the old man's jars, all we could drink.
Nine nights they passed the hours, hovering over me,
, keeping the watch by rounds. The fires never died,
one ablaze in the colonnade of the walled court,
one in the porch outside my bedroom doors.
But then,
when the tenth night came on me, black as pitch,
I burst the doors of the chamber bolted tight
and out I rushed, I leapt the walls at a bound,
giving the slip to guards and women servants.
And away I fled through the whole expanse of HelIas
and gaining the good dark soil of Phthia, mother of flocks,
I reached the king, and Peleus gave me a royal welcome.
Peleus loved me as a father loves a son, I tell you,
his only child, the heir to his boundless wealth,
he made me a rich man, he gave me throngs of subjects,
I ruled the Dolopes, settling down on Phthia's west frontier.
And I made you what you are-strong as the gods, AchillesI loved you from the heart. You'd never go with another
to banquet on the town or feast in your own halls.
Never, until I'd sat you down on my knees

267

560

570

580

590

268

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

and cut you the first bits of meat, remember?
You'd eat your fill, I'd hold the cup to your lips
and all too often you soaked the shirt on my chest,
spitting up some wine, a baby's way .., a misery.
Oh I had my share of troubles for you, Achilles,
did my share of labor. Brooding, never forgetting
the gods would bring no son of mine to birth,
not from my own loins.
So you, Achillesgreat godlike Achilles-I made you my son, I tried,
so someday you might fight disaster off my back.
But now, Achilles, beat down your mounting fury!
It's wrong to have such an iron, ruthless heart.
Even the gods themselves can bend and change,
and theirs is the greater power, honor, strength.
Even the gods, I say, with incense, soothing vows.
with full cups poured and the deep smoky savor
men can bring them round, begging for pardon
when one oversteps the mark, does something wrong.
We do have Prayers, you know, Prayers for forgiveness,
daughters of mighty Zeus .., and they limp and halt,
they're all wrinkled, drawn, they squint to the side,
can't look you in the eyes, and always bent on duty.
trudging after Ruin, maddening, blinding Ruin.
But Ruin is strong and swiftShe outstrips them all by far, stealing a march,
leaping over the whole wide earth to bring mankind to grief.
And the Prayers trail after, trying to heal the wounds.
And then, if a man reveres these daughters of Zeus
as they draw near him, they will help him greatly
and listen to his appeals. But if one denies them,
turns them away, stiff-necked and harsh-off they go
to the son of Cronus, Zeus, and pray that Ruin
will strike the man down, crazed and blinded
until he's paid the price.
Relent, Achilles-you too!
See that honor attend these good daughters of Zeus,
honor that sways the minds of others, even heroes.

{489-514}

600

610

620

[5/5-44[

BOOK 9:



269

If Agamemnon were not holding out such gifts,
with talk of more to come, that son of Atreus,

if the warlord kept on blustering in his anger, why,
I'd be the last to tell you, 'Cast your rage to the windsl
Defend your friends!'-despite their desperate straits.
But now, look, he gives you a trove of treasures
right away, and vows there are more to follow.
He sends the bravest captains to implore you,
leaders picked from the whole Achaean army,
comrades-in-arms that you love most yourself.
Don't dismiss their appeal, their expedition herethough no one could blame your anger, not before.
So it was in the old days too. So we've heard
in the famous deeds of fighting men, of heroes,
when seething anger would overcome the great ones.
Still you could bring them round with gifts and winning words.
There's an old tale I remember, an ancient exploit,
nothing recent, but this is how it went .. ,
We are all friends here-let me tell it now.
The Curetes were fighting the combat-hard Aetolians,
armies ringing Calydon, slaughtering each other,
Aetolians defending their city's handsome walls
and Curetes primed to lay them waste in battle.
It all began when Anemis throned in gold
loosed a disaster on them, incensed that Oeneus
offered her no first fruits, his orchard's crowning glory.
The rest of the gods had feasted full on oxen, true,
but the Huntress alone, almighty Zeus's daughterOeneus gave her nothing. It slipped his mind
or he failed to care, but what a fatal error!
How she fumed, Zeus's child who showers arrows,
she loosed a bristling wild boar, his tusks gleaming,
crashing his savage, monstrous way through Oeneus' orchard,
ripping up whole trunks from the earth to pitch them headlong,
rows of them, roots and all, appleblossoms and all!
But the son of Oeneus, Meleager, cut him downmustering hunters out of a dozen cities,

630

640

650

660

270

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

packs of hounds as well. No slim band of men
could ever finish him off, that rippling killer,
he stacked so many men atop the tear-soaked pyre.
But over his body the goddess raised a terrific din,
a war for the prize, the huge beast's head and shaggy hideCuretes locked to the death with brave Aetolians.
Now,
so long as the battle-hungry Meleager fought,
it was deadly going for the Curetes. No hope
of holding their ground outside their own city walls,
despite superior numbers. But then, when the wrath
came sweeping over the man, the same anger that swells
the chests of others, for all their care and self-controlthen, heart enraged at his own dear mother Althaea,
Meleager kept to his bed beside his wedded wife,
Cleopatra .., that great beauty. Remember her?
The daughter of trim-heeled Marpessa, Euenus' child.
and her husband Idas, strongest man of the men
who once walked the earth-he even braved Apollo,
he drew his bow at the Archer, all for Marpessa
the girl with lovely ankles. There in the halls
her father and mother always called Cleopatra Halcyon,
after the seabird's name .., grieving once for her own fate
her mother had raised the halcyon's thin, painful cry,
wailing that lord Apollo the distant deadly Archer
had whisked her far from Idas.
Meleager's Cleopatrashe was the one he lay beside those days,
brooding over his heartbreaking anger.
He was enraged by the curses of his mother,
volleys of curses she called down from the gods.
So racked with grief for her brother he had killed
she kept pounding fists on the earth that feeds us all.
kept crying out to the god of death and grim Persephone,
flung herself on the ground, tears streaking her robes
and she screamed out. 'Kill Meleager, kill my son!'
And out of the world of darkness a Fury heard her cries,

{545-72{

670

680

690

{572-603{

BOOK 9:



stalking the night with a FUry's brutal heart, and suddenlythunder breaking around the gates, the roar of enemies,
towers battered under assault. And Aetolia's elders
begged Meleager, sent high priests of the gods,
pleading, 'Come out now! defend your people now!'and they vowed a princely gift.
Wherever the richest land of green Calydon lay,
there they urged him to choose a grand estate,
full fifty acres, half of it turned to vineyards,
half to open plowland, and carve it from the plain.
And over and over the old horseman Oeneus begged him,
he took a stand at the vaulted chamber's threshold,
shaking the bolted doors, begging his own son!
Over and over his brothers and noble mother
implored him-he refused them all the moreand troops of comrades, devoted, dearest friends.
Not even they could bring his fighting spirit round
until, at last, rocks were raining down on the chamber,
Curetes about to mount the towers and torch the great city!
And then, finally, Meleager's bride, beautiful Cleopatra
begged him, streaming tears, recounting all the griefs
that fall to people whose city's seized and plunderedthe men slaughtered, citadel burned to rubble, enemies
dragging the children, raping the sashed and lovely women.
How his spirit leapt when he heard those horrors-eand buckling his gleaming armor round his body,
out he rushed to war. And so he saved them all
from the fatal day, he gave way to his own feelings,
but too late, No longer would they make good the gifts,
those troves of gifts to warm his heart, and even so
he beat off that disaster .., empty-handed.
But you, you wipe such thoughts from your mind.
Don't let your spirit turn you down that path, dear boy.
Harder to save the warships once they're up in flames.
Now-while the gifts still wait-go out and fight!
Go-the Achaeans all will honor you like a god!

271

700

710

720

730

272

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

/604-30/

But enter this man-killing war without the giftsyour fame will flag, no longer the same honor,
even though you hurl the Trojans home!"
But the swift runner Achilles answered firmly,
"Phoenix, old father, bred and loved by the gods.
what do I need with honor such as that?
I say my honor lies in the great decree of Zeus.
That gift will hold me here by the beaked ships
as long as the life breath remains inside my chest
and my springing knees will lift me. Another thingtake it to heart. I urge you. Stop confusing
my fixed resolve with this, this weeping and wailing
just to serve his pleasure. Atreus' mighty son.
It degrades you to curry favor with that man,
and I will hate you for it, I who love you.
It does you proud to stand by me, my friend,
to attack the man who attacks mebe king on a par with me, take half my honors!
These men will carry their message back, but you,
you stay here and spend the night in a soft bed.
Then, tomorrow at first light, we will decide
whether we sail home or hold out here."
With that,
he gave Patroclus a sharp glance, a quiet nod
to pile the bedding deep for Phoenix now,
a sign to the rest to think of leaving quickly.
Giant Ajax rose to his feet, the son of Telamon,
tall as a god, turned and broke his silence:
"Ready, Odysseus? Royal son of Laertes,
great tactician-s-come, home we go now.
There's no achieving our mission here, I see,
not with this approach. Best to return at once.
give the Achaeans a full report, defeating as it is.
They must be sitting there, waiting for us now.
Achilleshe's made his own proud spirit so wild in his chest,
so savage, not a thought for his comrades' love-

740

750

760



273

we honored him past all others by the ships.
Hard, ruthless man ...
Why, any man will accept the blood-price paid
for a brother murdered, a child done to death.
And the murderer lives on in his own countrythe man has paid enough, and the injured kinsman
curbs his pride, his smoldering, vengeful spirit,
once he takes the price.
You-the gods have planted
a cruel, relentless fury in your chest! AIUor a girl,
just one, and here we offer you seven-outstanding beautiesthat, and a treasure trove besides.: Achilles,
put some human kindness in your heart.
Show respect for your own house. Here we are,
under your roof, sent from the whole Achaean force!
Past all other men, all other Achaean comrades,
we long to be your closest, dearest friends."

770

(631-571

BOOK 9:

And the swift runner Achilles answered warmly,
"Ajax, royal son of Telarnon, captain of armies,
all well said, after my own heart, or mostly so.
But my heart still heaves with rage
whenever I call to mind that arrogance of hishow he mortified me, right in front of the Argivesthat son of Atreus treating me like some vagabond.
like some outcast stripped of all my rights!
You go back to him and declare my message:
I will not think of arming for bloody war again,
not till the son of wise King Priam, dazzling Hector
batters all the way to the Myrmidon ships and shelters,
slaughtering Argives, gutting the hulls with fire.
But round my own black ship and camp this Hector
blazing for battle will be stopped, I truststopped dead in his tracks!"
So he finished.
Then each man, lifting his own two-handled cup,
poured it out to the gods, and back they went
along the ships, Odysseus in the lead.

780

790

800

274

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

Patroclus told his friends and serving-women
to pile a deep warm bed for Phoenix, quickly.
They obeyed and spread the bed as he ordered,
with fleeces, woolen throws and soft linen sheets.
There the old man lay, awaiting shining Dawn.
And deep in his well-built lodge Achilles slept
with the woman he brought from Lesbos, Phorbas' daughter,
Diomede in all her beauty sleeping by his side.
And over across from him Patroclus slept
with the sashed and lovely Iphis by his side,
whom Prince Achilles gave him the day he took
the heights of Scyros, Enyeus' rocky stronghold.
But once the envoys reached Atrides' shelters,
comrades leapt to their feet, welcomed them back
and clustering round them, lifted golden cups.
One after another pressed them with questions,
King Agamemnon most urgent of all: "Come-tell me, famous Odysseus, Achaea's pride and glorywill he fight the fire off the ships? Or does he refuse,
does rage still grip his proud, mighty spirit?"
And the steady, long-enduring Odysseus replied,
"Great marshal Atrides, lord of men Agamemnon,
that man has no intention of quenching his rage.
He's still bursting with anger, more than ever, he spurns you, spurns all your gifts. Work out
your own defense, he says, you and your captains
save the Argive armies and the ships. Himself?
Achilles threatens, tomorrow at first light,
to haul his well-benched warships out to sea.
And what's more, he advises all the rest,
'Sail home now. You will never set your eyes
on the day of doom that topples looming Troy.
Thundering Zeus has spread his hands above her ...
her armies have taken heart.'
That's his answer.
And here are men to confirm it, fellow envoys.

(658-88]

810

820

8)0

/689-713/

BOOK 9:



Ajax and two heralds, both dear-headed men.
But old Phoenix passes the night in camp
as Achilles bids him, so he can voyage home,
home in the ships with him to the fatherland they love.
Tomorrow at dawn. But only if Phoenix wishes.
He will never force the Oman to go."
So he reponed.
Silence held them all, struck dumb by his story,
Odysseus' words still ringing in their ears.
A long while they said nothing, spirits dashed.
Finally Diomedes lord of the war cry broke fonh:
"Great marshal Atrides, lord of men Agamemnonif only you'd never begged the dauntless son of Peleus,
holding out to Achilles trove on trove of gifts!
He's a proud man at the best of times, and now
you've only plunged him deeper in his pride.
I say have done with the manwhether he sails for home or stays on here.
He'll fight again-in his own good time-whenever
the courage in him flares and a god fires his blood.
So come, follow my orders. And all of us unite.
Go to sleep now, full to your heart's content
with food and wine, a soldier's strength and nerve,
Then when the Dawn's red fingers shine in all their glory,
quickly deploy your chariots and battalions, Agamemnon,
out in front of the ships-you spur them on
and you yourself, you fight in the front ranks!"

And Achaea's kings all shouted their assent,
stirred by the stallion-breaking Diomedes' challenge.
Pouring cups to the gods, each warlord sought his shelter.
There they spent the night and took the gift of sleep.

275
840

850

860

BOOK

SIXTEEN

Patroclus
Fights and Dies
So they fought to the death around that benched beaked ship
as Patroclus reached Achilles, his great commander,
and wept warm tears like a dark spring running down
some desolate rock face, its shaded currents flowing.
And the brilliant runner Achilles saw him coming.
filled with pity and spoke out winging words:
"Why in tears. Patroclus?
Like a girl, a baby running after her mother,
begging to be picked up, and she tugs her skirts,
holding her back as she tries to hurry off-all tears,
fawning up at her, till she takes her in her arms ...
That's how you look, Patroclus, streaming live tears.
But why? Some news for the Myrmidons, news for me?
Some message from Phthia that you alone have heard?
They tell me Menoetlus, Actor's son, is still alive,
412

10

{/5-44/


and Peleus, Aeacus' son, lives on among his Myrmidons-if both our fathers had died, we'd have some cause for grief.
Or weeping over the Argives, are you? Seeing them die
against the hollow ships, repaid for their offenses?
Out with it now! Don't harbor it deep inside you.
We must share it all."
With a wrenching groan
you answered your friend, Patroclus 0 my rider:
"Achilles, son of Peleus, greatest of the Achaeans,
spare me your anger, please-such heavy blows have overwhelmed the troops.
Our former champions, all laid up in the ships,
all are hit by arrows or run through by spears.
There's powerful Diomedes brought down by an archer,
Odysseus wounded, and Agamemnon too, the famous spearman,
and Eurypylus took an arrow-shot in the thigh . . .
Healers are working over them, using all their drugs,
trying to bind the woundsBut you are intractable, Achilles!
Pray god such anger never seizes me, such rage you nurse.
Cursed in your own courage! What good will a man,
even one in the next generation, get from you
unless you defend the Argives from disaster?
You heart of iron! He was not your father,
the horseman Peleus-Thetis was not your mother.
Never. The salt gray sunless ocean gave you birth
and the towering blank rocks-your temper's so relentless.
But still, if down deep some prophecy makes you balk,
some doom your noble mother revealed to you from Zeus,
well and good: at least send me into battle, quickly,
Let the whole Myrmidon army follow my commandI might bring some light of victory to pur Argives!
And give me your own fine armor to buckle on my back,
so the Trojans might take me for you, Achilles, yes,
hold off from attack, and Achaea's fighting sons
get second wind, exhausted as they are ...
Breathing room in war is all too brief.
We're fresh, unbroken. The enemy's battle-weary-

413

20

30

40

50

414

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

we could roll those broken Trojans back to Troy,
clear of the ships and shelters!"
So he pleaded,
lost in his own great innocence ...
condemned to beg for his own death and brutal doom.
And moved now to his depths, the famous runner cried,
"No, no, my prince, Patroclus, what are you saying?
Prophecies? None that touch me. None I know of.
No doom my noble mother revealed to me from Zeus,
just this terrible pain that wounds me to the quickwhen one man attempts to plunder a man his equal,
to commandeer a prize, exulting so in his own power.
That's the pain that wounds me, suffering such humiliation.
That girl-the sons of Achaea picked her as my prize,
and I'd sacked a walled city, won her with my spear
but right from my grasp he tears her, mighty Agamemnon,
that son of Atreus! Treating me like some vagabond,
some outcast stripped of all my rights . . .
Enough.
Let bygones be bygones now. Done is done.
How on earth can a man rage on forever?
Still, by god, I said I would not relax my anger,
not till the cries and carnage reached my own ships.
So you, you strap my splendid armor on your back,
you lead our battle-hungry Myrmidons into action/if now, in fact, the black cloud of the Trojans
blasts down on the ships with full gale force,
our backs to the breaking surf but clinging still
to a cramped strip of land-the Argives, lost.
The whole city of Troy comes trampling down on us,
daring, wild-why? They cannot see the brow of my helmet
flash before their eyes-Oh they'd soon run for their lives
and choke the torrent-beds of the field with all their corpses
if only the mighty Agamemnon met me with respect:
now, as it is, they're fighting round our campI
No spear rages now in the hand of Diomedes,
keen to save the Argives from disaster . . .
I can't even hear the battle cry of Agamemnon

/44-76/

60

70

80

{77-104j

BOOK 16:



break from his hated skull. But it's man-killing Hector
calling his Trojans on, his war cries crashing round me,
savage cries of his Trojans sweeping the whole plain,
victors bringing the Argive armies to their knees.
Even so, Patroclus, fight disaster off the ships.
fling yourself at the Trojans full forcebefore they gut our hulls with leaping fire
and tear away the beloved day of our return.
But take this conunand to heart-obey it to the end.
So you can win great honor, great glory for me
in the eyes of all the Argive ranks, and they,
they'll send her back, my lithe and lovely girl.
and top it off with troves of glittering gifts.
Once you have whipped the enemy from the fleet
you must come back, Patrodus. Even if Zeus
the thundering lord of Hera lets you seize your glory,
you must not bum for war against these Trojans,
madmen lusting for battle-not without meyou will only make my glory that much less ...
You must not, lost in the flush and fire of triumph,
slaughtering Trojans outright, drive your troops to Troywhat if one of the gods who never die comes down
from Olympus heights to intervene in battle?
The deadly Archer loves his Trojans dearly.
No, you must turn backsoon as you bring the light of victory to the ships.
Let the rest of them cut themselves to pieces on the plain!
Oh would to god-Father Zeus. Athena and lord Apollonot one of all these Trojans could flee his death, not one,
no Argive either, but we could stride from the slaughter
so we could bring Troy's hallowed crown of towers
toppling down around us-you and I alone!"
And so the comrades roused each other now.
But Ajax could hold his post on the decks no longer.
He was overwhelmed by the latest salvos, driven back
by the will of Zeus and the fearless Trojan spearmen
hurling blows nonstop-a terrific din at his temples,

415

100

11.0

120

416

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

{l04-JJ/

his shining helmet clashing under repeated blows,
relentless blows beating his forged cheek-irons.
And the joint of his left shoulder ached with labor.
forever bracing his huge burnished shield rock-steady,
but they could not wrench it loose from round his body
for all their pelting weapons. Again and again
he fought for breath, gasping, bathed in sweat
rivering down his body, his limbs soaked and sleek ...
where could he find some breathing room in battle?
Wherever he looked, pains heaped on pains.
Sing to me now,
you Muses, you who hold Olympus' vaulting halls,
how fire was first pitched on Achaea's ships!
Hector lunged at Ajax toe-to-toe.
hacked his ash-wood pike with a heavy sword
and striking the socket just behind the point
he slashed the head clean off, leaving the shaft,
the lopped stump dangling in Ajax' fist, useless,
bronze head bounding away, clanging along the ground.
And deep in his hean brave Ajax knew and shudderedhere was work of the gods, thundering Zeus on high,
cutting him off from battle, dashing all his plans,
Zeus, determined to grant the Trojans triumph now.
So Ajax drew back, out of range, and thenthey flung their tireless fire at a fast trim ship.
She was up in flames at once, engulfed in quenchless fire,
in a flash the blaze went swirling round the stem
and Achilles slapped his thighs and urged Patroclus,
"To arms-Patroclus, prince and master horseman!
I can see the blaze go roaring up the ships.
They must not destroy them. No escape-route then.
Quick, strap on my gear-I'll rouse the troops,"
That was all,
and Patroclus armed himself in Achilles' gleaming bronze.
First he wrapped his legs with the well-made greaves,
fastened behind the heels with silver ankle-clasps,
next he strapped the breastplate round his chest,

no

t40

150

/134-64/

BOOK 16.



blazoned with stars-swift Achilles' ownthen over his shoulder Patroclus slung the sword,
the fine bronze blade with its silver-studded hilt,
and then the shield-strap and the sturdy, massive shield
and over his powerful head he set the well-forged helmet.
the horsehair crest atop it tossing, bristling terror,
and he took two rugged spears that fit his grip.
And Achilles' only weapon Patroclus did not take
was the great man's spear, weighted, heavy, tough.
No other Achaean fighter could heft that shaft,
only Achilles had the skill to wield it well:
Pelian ash it was, a gift to his father Peleus
presented by Chiron once, hewn on Pelion's crest
to be the death of heroes.
Now the war-team.
Patroclus ordered Automedon to yoke them quicklya man he honored next to Achilles breaker of men,
always firmest in battle, nerved to wait the call.
So at his command Autornedon yoked the horses,
the rapid stallions Roan Beauty and Dapple,
the team that raced the gales, magnificent team
the storm-wind filly Lightfoot foaled for the West Wind,
grazing the lush green grass along the Ocean's tides.
And into the traces he ran the purebred Bold DancerAchilles seized him once when he stormed Eetion's city,
a mortal war-horse pacing immortal horses now.
Prince Achilles, ranging his ranks of Myrmidons,
arrayed them along the shelters, all in annor.
Hungry as wolves that rend and bolt raw flesh,
hearts filled with battle-frenzy that never diesoff on the cliffs, ripping apart some big antlered stag
they gorge on the kill till all their jaws drip red with blood,
then down in a pack they lope to a pooling, dark spring,
their lean sharp tongues lapping the water's surface,
belching bloody meat, but the fury, never shaken,
builds inside their chests though their glutted bellies burstso wild the Mynnidon captains, Myrmidon field commanders

417
160

170

180

190

418

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

/165-97/

swarming round Achilles' dauntless friend-in-arms.
And there in the midst Achilles stood like the god of war,
urging his charioteers and fighters bracing shields..
There were fifty fast black ships that bore his troops
when Achilles dear to Zeus sailed east for Troy.
Fifty fighters aboard each, manning the oarlocks,
five captains he named, entrusted with command,
but he himself in his martial power ruled them all ...
The first battalion was led by Menesthius bright in bronze,
son of Spercheus River swelled by the rains of Zeus
and born by the lovely Polydora, Peleus' daughter,
when a girl and the god of a tireless river bedded down.
But they called him the son of Borus, Perieres' son
who showered the girl with countless bridal gifts,
his wedded bride, in the sight of all the world.
The next battalion was led by fighting Budorus.
born out of wedlock too. Phylas' daughter,
Polymela the gorgeous dancer bore the man
when irresistible Herrnes, Hermes the giant-killer
lusted for her once-she ravished the god's bright eyes,
swaying among the dancers singing goddess Anemis
with arrow of gold and cry that halloos the hunt.
And straightway up to her chamber Hermes climbed,
the Healer, in secret, lay in her arms in love
and the woman bore the god a radiant son, Eudorus-lightning on his feet and a crack man of war.
But soon as the Lady of Labor's binhing pangs
brought him to light and he saw the blaze of day,
Actor's majestic son the powerful lord Echecles
led her home to his house with troves of bridal gifts
while old King Phylas reared the boy with kindness,
tending, 'embracing the young Eudorus like a son.
The third battalion was led by brave Pisander,
Maemalus' son, who outfought them all with spears,
all the Myrmidons after Achilles' friend Patroclus.
The fourth was led by the old horseman Phoenix,
Alcimedon led the fifth, Laerces' gallant son.

200

210

220

230

1198-22~1

BOOK 16:



419

But soon as Achilles mustered all battalions,
positioned in battle-order led by captains,
he imposed this stem command on all his troops:
"Mynnidons! Not one of you dare forget those threats
you hurled from the fast trim ships against the Trojans
all the while I raged, and I was the one you blamed,
down to the last fighter: 'Brutal son of Peleusyour mother nursed you on gall! Merciless, iron man240
confining your own men to the ships against their willl
So home we go in those ships and cut the seas again,
since now such deadly anger strikes our captain:
Denouncing memy comrades, clustered together, always grumbling.
Well, here's a tremendous work of battle, look,
blazing before your eyes
and just the son you longed for all those days.
So each man tense with courage-fight the Trojans downl"
That was the cry that fired each soldier's hean.
Hearing the king's command the ranks pulled closer,
tight as a mason packs a good stone wall,
blocks on granite blocks for a storied house
that fights the ripping winds-crammed so close
the crested helmets, the war-shields bulging, jutting,
buckler-to-buckler, helm-to-helm, man-to-man massed tight
and the horsehair crests on glittering helmet horns brushed
as they tossed their heads, the battalions bulked so dense.
And out before them all, two men took battle-stations,
Patrodus and Automedon, seized with a single fury
to fight in the comrades' vanguard, far in front.
But Achilles strode back to his shelter now
and opened the lid of the princely inlaid sea chest
that glistening-footed Thetis stowed in his ship to carry,
filled to the brim with war-shirts, windproof cloaks
and heavy fleecy rugs. And there it rested ...
his handsome, well-wrought cup. No other man
would drink the shining wine from its glowing depths,

250

260

4~O

HOMER;

THE ILIAD

IZ27-57}

nor would Achilles pour the wine to any other god,
none but Father Zeus. Lifting it from the chest
270
he purified it with sulphur crystals first
then rinsed it out with water running clear,
washed his hands and filled it bright with wine.
And then, taking a stand before his lodge, he prayed,
pouring the wine to earth and scanning the high skies
and the god who loves the lightning never missed a word:
"King Zeus-Pelasgian Zeus, lord of Dodona's holy shrine,
dwelling far away, brooding over Dodona's bitter winters!
Your prophets dwelling round you, Zeus, the Selli
sleeping along the ground with unwashed feet ...
If you honored me last time and heard my prayer
280
and rained destruction down on all Achaea's ranks,
now, once more, I beg you, bring my prayer to pass!
I myself hold out on shore with the beached ships here
but I send my comrade forth to war with troops of MyrmidonsLaunch glory along with him, high lord of thunder, Zeus!
Fill his hean with courage-so even Hector learns
if Patroclus has the skill to fight his wars alone,
my friend-in, arms, or his hands can rage unvanquished
only when I go wading in and face the grind of battle.
aut once he repels the roaring onslaught from the ships
290
let him come back to me and our fast fleet-unharmedwtth all my armor round him, all our comrades
fighting round my friend!"
So Achilles prayed
and Zeus in all his wisdom heard those prayers.
One prayer the Father granted, the other he denied:
Patrodus would drive the onslaught off the shipsthat much Zeus granted, true,
but denied him safe and sound return from battle.
Once Achilles had poured the wine and prayed to Zeus,
300
he returned to his shelter, stowed the cup in the chest
then took his stand outside, his spirit yearning still
to watch Achaeans and Trojans struggle to the death.

And there-Meriones killed a Trojan captain,
Laogonus, daring son of Onetor, priest of Zeus,
Idaean Zeus, and his land revered him like a godMeriones gouged him under the jaw and ear, his spirit
flew from his limbs and the hateful darkness gripped him.
Just then Aeneas hurled his brazen spear at Meriones,
hoping to hit the man as he charged behind his shield.
But he eyed Aeneas straight on, he dodged the bronze,
ducking down with a quick lunge, and behind his back
the heavy spearshaft plunged and stuck in the earth,
the butt- end quivering into the air till suddenly
rugged Ares snuffed its fury out, dead still.
The weapon shaking, planted fast in the ground,
his whole arm's power poured in a wasted shot,
Aeneas flared in anger, shouting out, "Merionesgreat dancer as you are, my spear would have slopped
your dancing days for good if only I had hit youl"
The hardy spearman Meriones shot back, "Aeneasgreat man of war as you are, you'll find it hard
to quench the fire of every man who fights you.
You too are made of mortal stuff, I'd say. And I,
if I'd lanced your guts with bronze-strong as you are
and cocksure of your hands-you'd give me glory now,
you'd give your life to the famous horseman Death!"
But Patroclus nerved for battle dressed him down:
"Meriones, brave as you are, why bluster on this way?

/593-627/

700

110

720

{628-58j

BOOK 16:



Trust me, my friend, you'll never force the Trojans
back from this corpse with a few stinging tauntsEarth will bury many a man before that. Come-the proof of battle is action, proof of words, debate.
No time for speeches now, it's time to fight."
Breaking off, he led the way as Meriones followed,
staunch as a god. And loud as the roar goes up
when men cut timber deep in the mountain glades
and the pounding din of axes echoes miles awayso the pound and thud of blows came rising up
from the broad earth, from the trampled paths of war
and the bronze shields and tough plied hides struck hard
as the swords and two-edged spearheads stabbed against them.
Not even a hawk-eyed scout could still make out Sarpedon,
the man's magnificent body covered over head to toe,
buried under a mass of weapons, blood and dust.
But they still kept swarming round and round the corpse
like flies in a sheepfold buzzing over the brimming pails
in the first spring days when the buckets flood with milk.
So veteran troops kept swarming round that corpse,
never pausing-nor did mighty Zeus for a moment
turn his shining eyes from the clash of battle.
He kept them fixed on the struggling mass forever,
the Father's spirit churning, thrashing out the ways,
the numberless ways to cause Patroclus' slaughter ...
To kill him too in this present bloody rampage
over Sarpedon's splendid body? Hector in glory
cutting Patroclus down with hacking bronze
then tearing the handsome war-gear off his back?
Or let him take still more, piling up his kills?
As Zeus turned things over, that way seemed the best:
the valiant friend-in-arms of Peleus' son Achilles
would drive the Trojans and Hector helmed in bronze
back to Troy once more, killing them by platoonsand Zeus began with Hector, he made the man a coward.
Hector leaping back in his chariot, swerving to rly, '
shouted out fresh orders-vRetreat. Trojans, now!"

433

730

740

750

760

434

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

He knew that Zeus had tipped the scales against him.
A rout-not even the die-hard Lycians stood their ground,
they all scattered in panic, down to the last man
when they saw their royal king speared in the heart,
Sarpedon sprawled there in the muster of the dead,
for men by the squad had dropped across his corpse
once Zeus stretched tight the lethal line of battle.
So then the Achaeans ripped the armor off his back,
Sarpedon's gleaming bronze that Menoetius' son
the brave Patrodus flung in the arms of cohorts
poised to speed those trophies back to the beaked ships.
And storming Zeus was stirring up Apollo: "On with it nowsweep Sarpedon dear of the weapons, Phoebus my friend,
and once you wipe the dark blood from his body,
bear him far from the fighting, off and away,
and bathe him well in a river's running tides
and anoint him with deathless oils . . .
dress his body in deathless, ambrosial robes.
Then send him on his way with the wind-swift escorts,
twin brothers Sleep and Death, who with all good speed
will set him down in the broad green land of Lycia.
There his brothers and countrymen will bury the prince
with full royal rites, with mounded tomb and pillar.
These are the solemn honors owed the dead."
So he decreed
and Phoebus did not neglect the Father's strong desires.
Down from Ida's slopes he dove to the bloody field
and lifting Prince Sarpedon clear of the weapons,
bore him far from the fighting, off and away,
and bathed him well in a river's running tides
and anointed him with deathless oils . . .
dressed his body in deathless, ambrosial robes
then sent him on his way with the wind-swift escorts.
twin brothers Sleep and Death, who with all good speed
set him down in Lycia's broad green land.
But Patroclus,
giving a cry to Automedon whipping on his team,
Patroclus went for Troy's and Lycia's lines,

[6S8-8S[

770

780

790

800

[685-714/

BOOK 16:



blind in his fatal frenzy-luckless soldier.
If only he had obeyed Achilles' strict command
he might have escaped his doom, the stark night of death.
But the will of Zeus will always overpower the will of men.
Zeus who strikes fear in even the bravest man of war
and tears away his triumph, all in a lightning flash,
and at other times he will spur a man to battle.
just as he urged Patroclus' fury now.
Patrocluswho was the first you slaughtered, who the last
when the great gods called you down to death?
First Adrestus, then Autonous, then Echeclus.
then Perimus, Megas' son. Epistor and Melanippus,
then in a flurry Blasus, Mulius and Pylarteshe killed them all but the rest were bent on flight.
And then and there the Achaeans might have taken Troy,
her towering gates toppling under Patroclus' power
heading the vanguard, storming on with his spear.
But Apollo took his stand on the massive rampart,
his mind blazing with death for him but help for Troy.
Three times Patroclus charged the jut of the high wall,
three times Apollo battered the man and hurled him back,
the god's immortal hands beating down on the gleaming shield.
Then at Patrodus' fourth assault like something superhuman.
the god shrieked down his winging words of terror: "BackPatroclus, Prince, go back! It is not the will of fate
that the proud Trojans' citadel fall before your spear,
not even before Achilles-far greater man than you!"
And Patroclus gave ground, backing a good way off,
dear of the deadly Archer's wrath.
But now Hector,
reining his high-strung team at the Scaean Gates,
debated a moment, waiting ...
should he drive back to the rout and soldier on?
Or call his armies now to rally within the ramparts?

435

810

820

830

436

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

As he turned things over, Apollo stood beside him,
taking the shape of that lusty rugged fighter
Asius, an uncle of stallion-breaking Hector.
a blood brother of Hecuba, son of Dymas
who lived in Phrygia near Sangarius' rapids.
Like him, Apollo the son of Zeus incited Hector:
"Hector, why stop fighting? Neglecting your duty!
If only I outfought you as you can outfight me,
I'd soon teach you to shirk your work in waryou'd pay the price, I swear. Up with you-fast!
Lash those pounding stallions straight at Patroclusyou might kill him still-Apollo might give you glory!"
And back Apollo strode, a god in the wars of men
while glorious Hector ordered skilled Cebriones,
"Flog the team to battle!" Apollo pressed on,
wading into the ruck, hurling Argives back in chaos
and handing glory to Hector and all the Trojan forces.
But Hector ignored the Argive masses, killing none,
he lashed his pounding stallions straight at Patroclus.
Patroclus, over against him, leapt down from his car
and hit the ground, his left hand shaking a spear
and seized with his right a jagged, glittering stone
his hand could just cover-Patroclus flung it hard.
leaning into the heave, not backing away from Hector,
no, and no wasted shot. But he hit his drivera bastard son of famed King Priam, Cebriones
yanking the reins back taut-right between the eyes.
The sharp stone crushed both brows, the skull caved in
and both eyes burst from their sockets, dropping down
in the dust before his feet as the reinsman vaulted,
plunging off his well-wrought car like a diverCebriones' life breath left his bones behind
and you taunted his corpse, Patroclus 0 my rider:
"Look what a springy man, a nimble, flashy rumbler!
Just think what he'd do at sea where the fish swarmwhy, the man could glut a fleet, diving for oysters!
Plunging overboard, even in choppy, heaving seas,

[715-48/

840

850

860

870

{749-80j

BOOK 16:



437

just as he dives to ground from his war-car now.
Even these Trojans have their tumblers-what a leap!"
And he leapt himself at the fighting driver's corpse
with the rushing lunge of a lion struck in the chest
as he lays waste pens of cattlehis own lordly courage about to be his death.
So you sprang at Cebriones, full fury, Patroclus,
as Hector sprang down from his chariot just across
and the two went tussling over the corpse as lions
up on the mountain ridges over a fresh-killed stagboth ravenous, proud and savage-fight it out to the death.
So over the driver here and both claw-mad for battle,
Patrodus son of Menoetius, Hector ablaze for glory
strained to slash each other with ruthless bronze.
Hector seized the corpse's head, would not let goPatrodus clung to a foot and other fighters clashed,
Trojans, Argives, all in a grueling, maiming onset.
As the East and South Winds fight in killer-squalls
deep in a mountain valley thrashing stands of timber,
oak and ash and comel with bark stretched taut and hard
and they whip their long sharp branches against each other,
a deafening roar goes up, the splintered timber crashingso Achaeans and Trojans crashed,
hacking into each other, and neither side now
had a thought of flight that would have meant disaster.
Showers of whetted spears stuck fast around Cebriones,
bristling winged arrows whipped from the bowstrings,
huge rocks by the salvo battering shields on shields
as they struggled round the corpse. And there he lay
in the whirling dust, overpowered in all his power
and Wiped from memory all his horseman's skills.
So till the sun bestrode the sky at high noon
the weapons hurtled side-to-side and men kept falling.
But 'once the sun wheeled past the hour for unyoking oxen,
then the Argives mounted a fiercer new attack,

880

890

900

438

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

/780-811/

fighting beyond their fates ...
They dragged the hero Cebriones out from under
the pelting shafts and Trojans' piercing cries
and they tore the handsome war-gear off his back
and Patroclus charged the enemy, fired for the kill.
Three times he charged with the headlong speed of Ares,
screaming his savage cry, three times he killed nine men.
Then at the fourth assault'Patroclus like something superhumanthen, Patroclus, the end of life came blazing up before you,
yes, the lord Apollo met you there in the heart of battle,
the god, the terror! Patroclus never saw him coming,
moving across the deadly rout, shrouded in thick mist
and on he came against him and looming up behind him nowslammed his broad shoulders and back with the god's flat hand
and his eyes spun as Apollo knocked the helmet off his head
and under his horses' hoofs it tumbled, clattering on
with its four forged horns and its hollow blank eyes
and its plumes were all smeared in the bloody dust.
Forbidden before this to defile its crest in dust,
it guarded the head and handsome brow of a god,
a man like a god, Achilles. But now the Father
gave it over to Hector to guard his head in war
since Hector's death was closing on him quickly.
Patroclus though-the spear in his grip was shattered,
the whole of its rugged bronze-shod shadow-casting length
and his shield with straps and tassels dropped from his shoulders,
flung down on the ground-and lord Apollo the son of Zeus
wrenched his breastplate off. Disaster seized himhis fine legs bucklinghe stood there, senselessAnd now,
right at his back, dose-up, a Dardan fighter speared him
squarely between the shoulder blades with a sharp lance.
Panthous' son Buphorbus, the best of his own age
at spears and a horseman's skill and speed of foot,
and even in this, his first attack in chariotsjust learning the arts of warhe'd brought down twenty drivers off their cars.

910

920

930

940

[8/2-381

BOOK 16:



He was the first to launch a spear against you,
PatrocIus 0 my rider, but did not bring you down.
Yanking out his ashen shaft from your body,
back he dashed and lost himself in the crowdsthe man would not stand up to PatrocIus here
in mortal combat, stripped, defenseless as he was.
PatrocIus stunned by the spear and the god's crushing blow
was weaving back to his own thronging comrades,
trying to escape death ...
Hector waiting, watching
the greathearted PatrocIus trying to stagger free,
seeing him wounded there with the sharp bronze
came rushing into him right across the lines
and rammed his spearshaft home,
stabbing deep in the bowels, and the brazen point
went jutting straight out through Patroclus' back.
Down he crashed-horror gripped the Achaean armies.
As when some lion overpowers a tireless wild boar
up on a mountain summit, battling in all their fury
over a little spring of water, both beasts craving
to slake their thirst, but the lion beats him down
with sheer brute force as the boar fights for breathso now with a close thrust Hector the son of Priam
tore the life from the fighting son of Menoetius,
from Patroclus who had killed so many men in war,
and gloried over him, wild winging words: "Patroclus-esurely you must have thought you'd storm my city down,
you'd wrest from the wives of Troy their day of freedom,
drag them off in ships to your own dear fatherlandyou fool! Rearing in their defense my war-team,
Hector's horses were charging out to battle,
galloping, full stretch. And I with my spear,
Hector, shining among my combat-loving comrades,
I fight away from them the fatal day-but you,
the vultures will eat your body raw!
Poor, doomed ...
not for all his power could Achilles save you nowand how he must have filled your ears with orders

439

950

960

970

440

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

as you went marching out and the hero stayed behind:
'Now don't come back to the hollow ships, you hear?Patroclus, master horsemannot till you've slashed the shirt around his chest
and soaked it red in the blood of man-killing Hector!'
So he must have commanded-you maniac, you obeyed."
.Struggling for breath, you answered. Patroclus 0 my rider,
"Hector! Now is your time to glory to the skies ...
now the victory is yours.
A gift of the son of Cronus, Zeus-Apollo toothey brought me down with all their deathless ease.
they are the ones who tore the armor off my back.
Even if twenty Hectors had charged against methey'd all have died here, laid low by my spear.
No, deadly fate in league with Apollo killed me.
From the ranks of men, Euphorbus. You came third,
and all you could do was finish off my life . . .
One more thing-take it to heart, I urge youyou too, you won't live long yourself. I swear.
Already I see them looming up beside you-death
and the strong force of fate, to bring you down
at the hands of Aeacus' great royal son ...
Achilles!"

{8J8-6J{

980

1000

Death cut him short. The end dosed in around him.
Flying free of his limbs
his soul went winging down to the House of Death,
wailing his fate, leaving his manhood far behind.
his young and supple strength. But glorious Hector
taunted Patrodus' body, dead as he was, "Why, Patrocluswhy prophesy my doom, my sudden death? Who knows?Achilles the son of sleek-hatred Thetis may outrace mestruck by my spear first-and gasp away his life!"
With that he planted a heel against Patrodus' chest.
wrenched his brazen spear from the wound, kicked him over,
flat on his back, free and dear of the weapon.

1010

{864-67}

BOOK 16:



At once he went for Automedon with that spearquick as a god, the aide of swift Achilleskeen to cut him down but his veering horses
swept him well away-magnificent racing stallions,
gifts of the gods to Peleus, shining immortal gifts.

441

So the men fought on like a mass of whirling fire
as swift Antilochus raced the message toward Achilles.
Sheltered under his curving, beaked ships he found him,
foreboding, deep down, all that had come to pass.
Agonizing now he probed his own great heart:
"Why, why? Our long-hatred Achaeans routed again,
driven in terror off the plain to crowd the ships, but why?
Dear gods, don't bring to pass the grief that haunts my heartthe prophecy that mother revealed to me one time ...
she said the best of the Myrmidons-while I livedwould fall at Trojan hands and leave the light of day.
And now he's dead, I know it. Menoetius' gallant son,
my headstrong friend! And I told Patroclus dearly,
'Once you have beaten off the lethal fire, quick,
come back to the ships-you must not battle Hector!' ..

10

467

468

HOMER.

THE ILIAD

115-44/

As such fears went churning through his mind
the warlord Nestor's son drew near him now,
streaming warm tears, to give the dreaded message:
"Ah son of royal Peleus, what you must hear from me!
What painful news-would to god it had never happened!
Patroclus has fallen. They're fighting over his corpse.
He's stripped, naked-Hector with that flashing helmet.
Hector has your arms!"
So the captain reported.
A black cloud of grief came shrouding over Achilles.
Both hands clawing the ground for soot and filth,
he poured it over his head, fouled his handsome face
and black ashes settled onto his fresh dean war-shirt.
Overpowered in all his power, sprawled in the dust,
Achilles lay there, fallen ...
tearing his hair, defiling it with his own hands.
And the women he and Patroclus carried off as captives
caught the grief in their hearts and keened and wailed,
out of the tents they ran to ring the great Achilles,
all of them beat their breasts with clenched fists,
sank to the ground, each woman's knees gave way.
Antilochus kneeling near, weeping uncontrollably,
clutched Achilles' hands as he wept his proud heart outfor fear he would slash his throat with an iron blade.
Achilles suddenly loosed a terrible, wrenching cry
and his noble mother heard him, seated near her father,
the Old Man of the Sea in the salt green depths,
and she cried out in turn. And immortal sea-nymphs
gathered round their sister, all the Nereids dwelling
down the sounding depths, they all came rushing nowGlitter, blossoming Spray and the swells' Embrace,
Fair-Isle and shadowy Cavern, Mist and Spindrift,
ocean nymphs of the glances pooling deep and dark,
Race-with-the-Waves and Headlands' Hope and Safe Haven,
Glimmer of Honey, Suave-and-Soothing, Whirlpool, Brilliance,
Bounty and First Light and Speeder of Ships and buoyant Power,
Welcome Home and Bather of Meadows and Master's Lovely
Consort,

20

30

40

50


Gift of the Sea, Eyes of the World and the famous milk-white Calm
and Truth and Never-Wrong and the queen who rules the tides
in beauty
and in rushed Glory and Healer of Men and the one who rescues
kings
and Sparkler, Down-from-the-Cliffs, sleek-haired Strands of Sand
and all the rest of the Nereids dwelling down the depths.
The silver cave was shimmering full of sea-nymphs,
all in one mounting chorus beating their breasts
as Thetis launched the dirge: "Hear me, sisters,
daughters of Nereus, so you all will know it welllisten to all the sorrows welling in my heart!
I am agonymother of grief and greatness-O my childl
Yes, I gave birth to a flawless, mighty son ...
the splendor of heroes, and he shot up like a young branch,
like a fine tree I reared him-the orchard's crowning glorybut only to send him off in the beaked ships to Troy
to battle Trojansl Never again will I embrace him
striding home through the doors of Peleus' house.
And long asI have him with me, still alive,
looking into the sunlight, he is racked with anguish.
And I. I go to his side-nothing I do can help him.
Nothing. But go I shall, to see my darling boy,
to hear what grief has come to break his heart
while he holds back from battle."
So Thetis cried
as she left the cave and her sisters swam up with her,
all in a tide of tears, and billowing round them now
the ground swell heaved open. And once they reached
the fertile land of Troy they all streamed ashore,
row on row in a long cortege, the sea-nymphs
filing up where the Myrmidon ships lay hauled,
clustered closely round the great runner Achilles ...
As he groaned from the depths his mother rose before him
and sobbing a sharp cry, cradled her son's head in her hands
and her words were all compassion, winging pity: "My childwhy in tears? What sorrow has touched your heart?

469

60

70

80

470

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

Tell me, please. Don't harbor it deep inside you.
Zeus has accomplished everything you wanted,
just as you raised your hands and prayed that day.
All the sons of Achaea are pinned against the ships
and all for want of you-they suffer shattering losses."
And groaning deeply the matchless runner answered,
"0 dear mother, true! All those burning desires
Olympian Zeus has brought to pass for mebut whatjoy to me now? My dear comrade's deadPatroclus-e-the man I loved beyond all other comrades,
loved as my own life-I've lost him-Hector's killed him,
stripped the gigantic armor off his back, a marvel to beholdmy burnished gear! Radiant gifts the gods presented Peleus
that day they drove you into a mortal's marriage bed ...
I wish you'd lingered deep with the deathless sea-nymphs,
lived at ease, and Peleus carried home a mortal bride.
But now, as it is, sorrows, unending sorrows must surge
within your heart as well-for your own son's death.
Never again will you embrace him striding home.
My spirit rebels-e-I've lost the will to live,
to take my stand in the world of men-unless,
before all else, Hector's battered down by my spear
and gasps away his life, the blood-price for Patroclus,
Menoetius' gallant son he's killed and stripped!"
But Thetis answered, warning through her tears,
"You're doomed to a short life, my son, from all you say!
For hard on the heels of Hector's death your death
must come at once-"
"Then let me die at once"Achilles burst out, despairing-"since it was not my fate
to save my dearest comrade from his death! Look,
a world away from his fatherland he's perished,
lacking me, my fighting strength, to defend him.
But now, since I shall not return to my fatherland ...
nor did I bring one ray of hope to my Patrodus,
nor to the rest of all my steadfast comrades,

{74-103}

90

lOO

110

120

f /03- 31j

BOOK 18:


countless ranks struck down by mighty HectorNo, no, here I sit by the ships ...
a useless, dead weight on the good green earth-sI, no man my equal among the bronze-armed Achaeans,
not in battle, only in wars of words that others win.
If only strife could die from the lives of gods and men
and anger that drives the sanest man to flare in outragebitter gall, sweeter than dripping streams of honey,
that swarms in people's chests and blinds like smokejust like the anger Agamemnon king of men
has roused within me now ...
Enough.
Let bygones be bygones. Done is done.
Despite my anguish I will beat it down,
the fury mounting inside me, down by force.
But now I'll go and meet that murderer head-on,
that Hector who destroyed the dearest life I know.
For my own death, I'll meet it freely-whenever Zeus
and the other deathless gods would like to bring it onl
Not even Herades fled his death, for all his power,
favorite son as he was to Father Zeus the King.
Fate crushed him, and Hera's savage anger.
And I too, if the same fate waits for me ...
I'll lie in peace, once I've gone down to death.
But now, for the moment, let me seize great gloryland drive some woman of Troy or deep-breasted Dardan
to claw with both hands at her tender cheeks and wipe away
her burning tears as the sobs come choking from her throatthey'll learn that I refrained from war a good long time!
Don't try to hold me back from the fighting, mother,
love me as you do. You can't persuade me now,"
The goddess of the glistening feet replied,
"Yes, my son, you're right. No coward's work.
to save your exhausted friends from headlong death.
But your own handsome war-gear lies in Trojan hands.
bronze and burnished-and Hector in that flashing helmet,
Hector glories in your armor, strapped across his back.

471

130

140

150

472

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

Not that he will glory in it long, I tell you:
his own destruction hovers near him now. Waitdon't fling yourself in the grind of battle yet,
not till you see me coming back with your own eyes.
Tomorrow I will return to you with the rising sun,
bearing splendid arms from Hephaestus, god of fire!"

{I JZ-64!

160

With that vow she turned away from her son
and faced and urged her sisters of the deep,
"Now down you go in the Ocean's folding gulfs
to visit father's halls-the Old Man of the Seaand tell him all. I am on my way to Olympus heights,
to the famous Smith Hephaestus-l pray he'll give my son
some fabulous armor full of the god's great fire!"
And under a foaming wave her sisters dove
as glistening-footed Thetis' soared toward OlYmpus
to win her dear son an immonal set of arms.
And now,
as her feet swept her toward Olympus, ranks of Achaeans,
fleeing man-killing Hector with grim, uneanhly cries,
reached the ships and the Hellespont's long shore.
As for Patroclus, there seemed no hope that Achaeans
could drag the corpse of Achilles' comrade out of range.
Again the Trojan troops and teams ovenook the body
with Hector son of Priam storming fierce as fire.
Three times illustrious Hector shouted for support,
seized his feet from behind, wild to drag him off,
three times the Aeantes, armored in battle-fury
fought him off the corpse. But Hector held firm,
staking all on his massive fighting strengthagain and again he'd hurl himself at the melee,
again and again stand fast with piercing cries
but he never gave ground backward, not one inch.
The helmed Aeantes could no more frighten Hector,
the proud son of Priam, back from Patroclus' corpse
than shepherds out in the field can scare a tawny lion
off his kill when the hunger drives the beast claw-mad.

170

180

: 90

{165-95/

BOOK 18:



And now Hector would have hauled the body away
and won undying glory ...
if wind-swift Iris had not swept from Olympus
bearing her message-Peleus' son must armbut all unknown to Zeus and the other gods
since Hera spurred her on. Halting near
she gave Achilles a flight of marching orders:
"To arms-son of Peleus! Most terrifying man alive!
Defend Patroclus! It's all for him, this merciless battle
pitched before the ships. They're mauling each other now,
Achaeans struggling to save the corpse from harm,
Trojans charging to haul it back to windy Troy.
Flashing Hector's far in the lead, wild to drag it off,
furious to lop the head from its soft, tender neck
and stake it high on the city's palisade.
Up with youno more lying low! Writhe with shame at the thought
Patroclus may be sport for the dogs of Troy!
Yours, the shame will be yours
if your comrade's corpse goes down to the dead defiled!"

473

200

210

But the swift runner replied, "Immortal Iriswhat god has sped you here to tell me this?"
Quick as the wind the rushing Iris answered,
"Hera winged me on, the illustrious wife of Zeus.
But the son of Cronus throned on high knows nothing,
nor does any other immortal housed on Olympus
shrouded deep in snow."
Achilles broke in quickly-«
"How can I go to war? The Trojans have my gear.
And my dear mother told me I must not arm for battle,
not till I see her coming back with my own eyesshe vowed to bring me burnished arms from the god of fire.
I know of no other armor. Whose gear could I wear?
None but Telamonian Ajax' giant shield.
But he's at the front, I'm sure, engaging Trojans,
slashing his spear to save Patroclus' body."

220

474

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

Quick as the wind the goddess had a plan:
"We know-we too-they hold your famous annor.
Still, just as you are, go out to the broad trench
and show yourself to the Trojans. Struck with fear
at the sight of you, they might hold off from attack
and Achaea's fighting sons get second wind,
exhausted as they are ...
Breathing room in war is all too brief."
And Iris racing the wind went veering off
as Achilles. Zeus's favorite fighter, rose up now
and over his powerful shoulder Pallas slung the shield,
the tremendous storm-shield with all its tassels flaringand crowning his head the goddess swept a golden cloud
and from it she lit a fire to blaze across the field.
As smoke goes towering up the sky from out a town
cut off on a distant island under siege ...
enemies battling round it, defenders all day long
trading desperate blows from their own city walls
but soon as the sun goes down the signal fires flash,
rows of beacons blazing into the air to alert their neighbors-«
if only they'll come in ships to save them from disasterso now from Achilles' head the blaze shot up the sky.
He strode from the rampart, took his stand at the trench
but he would not mix with the milling Argive ranks.
He stood in awe of his mother's strict command.
So there he rose and loosed an enormous cry
and off in the distance Pallas shrieked out too
and drove unearthly panic through the Trojans.
Piercing loud as the trumpet's battle cry that blasts
from murderous raiding armies ringed around some cityso piercing now the cry that broke from Aeacides.
And Trojans hearing the brazen voice of Aeaddes,
all their spirits quaked-even sleek-maned horses,
sensing death in the wind, slewed their chariots round
and charioteers were struck dumb when they saw that fire,
relentless, terrible, burst from proud-hearted Achilles' head,
blazing as fiery-eyed Athena fueled the flames. Three times

{/96-228}

230

240

250

260

[l2B-57}

BOOK /8:



the brilliant Achilles gave his great war cry over the trench,
three times the Trojans and famous allies whirled in panicand twelve of their finest fighters died then and there,
crushed by chariots, impaled on their own spears.
And now the exultant Argives seized the chance
to drag Patroclus' body quickly out of range
and laid him on a litter ...
Standing round him, loving comrades mourned,
and the swift runner Achilles joined them, grieving,
weeping warm tears when he saw his steadfast comrade
lying dead on the bier, mauled by tearing bronze,
the man he sent to war with team and chariot
but never welcomed home again alive.

475

270

Now Hera the ox-eyed queen of heaven drove the sun,
untired and all unwilling, to sink in the Ocean's depths
and the sun went down at last and brave Achaeans ceased
the grueling clash of arms, the leveling rout of war.
And the Trojans in turn, far across the field,
pulling forces back from the last rough assault,
freed their racing teams from under chariot yokes
but before they thought of supper, grouped for council.
They met on their feet. Not one of them dared to sit
for terror seized them all-the great Achilles
who held back from the brutal fray so long
had just come blazing forth.
Panthous' son Polydamas led the debate,
a good clear head, and the only man who saw
what lay in the past and what the Trojans faced.
He was Hector's close comrade, born on the same night,
but excelled at trading words as he at trading spear-thrusts.
And now, with all good will, Polydamas rose and spoke:
"Weigh both sides of the crisis well, my friends.
What I urge is this: draw back to the city now.
Don't wait for the holy Dawn to find us here afield,
ranged by the ships-we're too far from our walls.
As long as that man kept raging at royal Agamemnon

280

290

476

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

the Argive troops were easier game to battle down.
I too was glad to camp the night on the shipways.
hopes soaring to seize their heavy rolling hulls.
But now racing Achilles makes my blood run cold.
So wild the man's fury he will never rest content,
holding out on the plain where Trojans and Argives
met halfway, exchanging blows in the savage onsetnever: he will fight for our wives, for Troy itself!
So retreat to Troy. Trust me-we will face disaster.
Now, for the moment, the bracing godsent night
has stopped the swift Achilles in his tracks.
But let him catch us lingering here tomorrow,
just as he rises up in arms-there may be some
who will sense his fighting spirit all too well.
You'll thank your stars to get back to sacred Troy,
whoever escapes him. Dogs and birds will have their fillof Trojan flesh, by heaven. Battalions of Trojans!
Pray god such grief will never reach my ears.
So follow my advice, hard as it may seem ...
Tonight conserve our strength in the meeting place,
and the great walls and gates and timbered doors we hung,
well-planed, massive and bolted tight, will shield the city.
But tomorrow at daybreak, armed to the hilt for battle.
we man the towering ramparts. All the worse for himif Achilles wants to venture forth from the fleet,
fight us round our walls. Back to the ships he'll go,
once he's lashed the power out of his rippling stallions,
whipping them back and forth beneath our city walls.
Not even his fury will let him crash our gateshe'll never plunder Troy.
Sooner the racing dogs will eat him raw!"
Helmet flashing. Hector wheeled with a dark glance:
"No more, Polydamas! Your pleading repels me now.
You say go back again-be crammed inside the city.
Aren't you sick of being caged inside those walls?
Time was when the world would talk of Priarn's Troy
as the city rich in gold and rich in bronze-but now

1258-901

300

310

320

asc

1190-3101

BOOK 18:



our houses are stripped of all their sumptuous treasures.
troves sold off and shipped to Phrygia, lovely Maeonia.
once great Zeus grew angry ...
But now, the moment the son of crooked Cronus
allows me to seize some glory here at the ships
and pin these Argives back against the seayou fool, enough! No more thoughts of retreat
paraded before our people. Not that one Trojan
will ever take your lead-I'll never permit it.
Come, follow my orders! All obey me now.
Take supper now. Take your posts through camp.
And no forgetting the watch, each man wide awake.
And any Trojan so weighed down, so oppressed
by his own possessions, let him collect the lot,
pass them round to the people-a grand public feast.
Far better for one of ours to reap the benefits
than all the marauding Argives. Then, as you say,
'tomorrow at daybreak, armed to the hilt for battle'we slash to attack against their deep curved hulls!
If it really was Achilles who reared beside the ships,
all the worse for him-if he wants his fill of war.
I for one. I'll never run from his grim assault,
I'll stand up to the man-see if he bears off glory
or I bear it off myself! The god of war is impartial:
he hands out death to the man who hands out death."
So Hector finished. The Trojans roared assent,
lost in folly. Athena had swept away their senses.
They gave applause to Hector's ruinous tactics.
none to Polydamas, who gave them sound advice.
And now their entire army settled down to supper
but all night long the Argives raised Patroclus' dirge.
And Achilles led them now in a throbbing chant of sorrow,
laying his man-killing hands on his great friend's chest,
convulsed with bursts of grief. Like a bearded lion
whose pride of cubs a deer-hunter has snatched away,
out of some thick woods, and back he comes, too late.
and his heart breaks but he courses after the hunter.

477

340

350

360

370

478

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

hot on his tracks down glen on twisting glenwhere can he find him?-gripped by piercing rage ...
so Achilles groaned, deeply, crying out to his Myrmidons,
"0 my captains! How empty the promise I let fall
that day I reassured Menoetius in his houseI promised the king I'd bring him back his son,
home to Opois, covered in glory, Troy sacked,
hauling his rightful share of plunder home, home.
But Zeus will never accomplish all our best-laid plans.
Look at us. Both doomed to stain red with our blood
the same plot of earth, a world away in Troy!
For not even I will voyage home again. Never.
No embrace in his halls from the old horseman Peleus
nor from mother, Thetis-this alien earth I stride
will hold me down at last.
But now, Patroclus,
since I will follow you underneath the ground,
I shall not bury you, no, not till I drag back here
the gear and head of Hector, who slaughtered you,
my friend, greathearted friend ...
Here in front of your flaming pyre I'll cut the throats
of a dozen sons of Troy in all their shining glory,
venting my rage on them for your destruction!
Till then you lie as you are beside my beaked ships
and round you the Trojan women and deep-breasted Dardans
will mourn you night and day, weeping burning tears,
women we fought to win-strong hands and heavy lance-whenever we sacked rich cities held by mortal men."
With that the brilliant Achilles ordered friends
to set a large three-legged cauldron over the fire
and wash the clotted blood from Patroclus' wounds
with all good speed. Hoisting over the blaze
a cauldron, filling it brimful with bathing water,
they piled fresh logs beneath and lit them quickly.
The fire lapped at the vessel's belly, the water warmed
and soon as it reached the boil in the glowing bronze
they bathed and anointed the body sleek with olive oil,

{321-50{

330

390

400

[35/-79j

BOOK 18:



closed each wound with a soothing, seasoned unguent
and then they laid Patroclus on his bier ...
covered him head to foot in a thin light sheet
and over his body spread the white linen shroud.
Then all night long, ringing the great runner Achilles,
Myrmidon fighters mourned and raised Patroclus' dirge.

479

410


BOOK

TWENTY-TWO


So all through Troy the men who had fled like panicked fawns
were wiping off their sweat, drinking away their thirst,
leaning along the city's massive ramparts now
while Achaean troops, sloping shields to shoulders,
dosed against the walls. But there stood Hector,
shackled fast by his deadly fate, holding his ground,
exposed in front of Troy and the Scaean Gates.
And now Apollo turned to taunt Achilles:
"Why are you chasing me? Why waste your speed?son of Peleus, you a mortal and I a deathless god.
You still don't know that I am immortal, do you?straining to catch me in your fury! Have you forgotten?
There's a war to fight with the Trojans you stampeded,
look, they're packed inside their city walls, but you,
you've slipped away out here. You can't kill me-

10

541

542

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

{13-4J{

I can never die-it's not my fate!"
Enraged at that,
Achilles shouted in mid-stride, "You've blocked my way,
you distant, deadly Archer, deadliest god of allyou made me swerve away from the rampan there.
Else what a mighty Trojan army had gnawed the dust
before they could ever straggle through their gates!
Now you've robbed me of great glory, saved their lives
with all your deathless ease. Nothing for you to fear,
no punishment to come. Oh I'd pay you back
if I only had the power at my command!"
No more words-he dashed toward the city,
heart racing for some great exploit, rushing on
like a champion stallion drawing a chariot full tilt,
sweeping across the plain in easy, tearing stridesso Achilles hurtled on, driving legs and knees.
And old King Priam was first to see him coming,
surging over the plain, blazing like the star
that rears at harvest, flaming up in its brilliance,far outshining the countless stars in the night sky,
that star they call Orlon's Dog-brightest of all
but a fatal sign emblazoned on the heavens,
it brings such killing fever down on wretched men.
So the bronze flared on his chest as on he racedand the old man moaned, flinging both hands high,
beating his head and groaning deep he called,
begging his dear son who stood before the gates,
unshakable, furious to fight Achilles to the death.
The old man cried, pitifully, hands reaching out to him,
"Oh Hector! Don't just stand there, don't, dear child,
waiting that man's attack-alone, cut off from friends!
You'll meet your doom at once, beaten down by Achilles,
so much stronger than you-that hard, headlong man.
Oh if only the gods loved him as much as I do ...
dogs and vultures would eat his fallen corpse at once!with what a load of misery lifted from my spirit.

30

40

50

/44-73/

BOOK 22'



That man who robbed me of many sons, brave boys.
cutting them down or selling them off as slaves,
shipped to islands half the world away ...
Even now there are two, Lycaon and PolydorusI cannot find them among the soldiers crowding Troy.
those sons Laothoe bore me, Laothoe queen of women.
But if they are still alive in the enemy's camp,
then we'll ransom them back with bronze and gold.
We have hoards inside the walls, the rich dowry
old and famous Altes presented with his daughter.
But if they're dead already, gone to the House of Death,
what grief to their mother's heart and mine-we gave them life.
For the rest of Troy, though, just a moment's grief
unless you too are battered down by Achilles.
Back, come back! Inside the walls, my boy!
Rescue the men of Troy and the Trojan womendon't hand the great glory to Peleus' son,
bereft of your own sweet life yourself.
Pity me too!still in my senses, true, but a harrowed, broken man
marked out by doom-past the threshold of old age. . .
and Father Zeus will waste me with a hideous fate,
and after I've lived to look on so much horror!
My sons laid low, my daughters dragged away
and the treasure-chambers looted, helpless babies
hurled to the earth in the red barbarity of war ...
my sons' wives hauled off by the Argives' bloody hands!
And I, I last of all-the dogs before my doors
will eat me raw, once some enemy brings me down
with his sharp bronze sword or spits me with a spear.
wrenching the life out of my body, yes, the very dogs
I bred in my own halls to share my table, guard my gatesmad, rabid at heart they'll lap their master's blood
and loll before my doors.
Ah for a young man
all looks fine and noble if he goes down in war,
hacked to pieces under a slashing bronze bladehe lies there dead .., but whatever death lays bare,

543

60

70

80

544

HOMER.

ru s ILIAD

all wounds are marks of glory. When an old man's killed
and the dogs go at the gray head and the gray beard
and mutilate the genitals-that is the cruelest sight
in all our wretched lives!"
So the old man groaned
and seizing his gray hair tore it out by the roots
but he could not shake the fixed resolve of Hector.
And his mother wailed now, standing beside Priam.
weeping freely, loosing her robes with one hand
and holding out her bare breast with the other,
her words pouring forth in a flight of grief and tears:
"Hector, my child! Look-have some respect for this!
Pity your mother too, if I ever gave you the breast
to soothe your troubles, remember it now, dear boybeat back that savage man from safe inside the walls!
Don't go forth, a champion pitted against himmerciless, brutal man. If he kills you now,
how can I ever mourn you on your deathbed?dear branch in bloom, dear child I brought to birth!Neither I nor your wife, that warm generous woman ...
Now far beyond our reach, now by the Argive ships
the rushing dogs will tear you, bolt your flesh!"
So they wept, the two of them crying out
to their dear son, both pleading time and again
but they could not shake the fixed resolve of Hector.
No, he waited Achilles, coming on, gigantic in power.
As a snake in the hills, guarding his hole, awaits a manbloated with poison, deadly hatred seething inside him,
glances flashing fire as he coils round his lair . . .
so Hector, nursing his quenchless fury, gave no ground,
leaning his burnished shield against a jutting wall,
but harried still, he probed his own brave heart:
"No way out. If I slip inside the gates and walls,
Polydamas will be first to heap disgrace on mehe was the one who urged me to lead our Trojans
back to Ilium just last night, the disastrous night
Achilles rose in arms like a god. But did I give way?

/7J-/03/

90

100

110

120

{/O3-))1

BOOK 22:



Not at all. And how much better it would have been!
Now my army's ruined, thanks to my own reckless pride,
I would die of shame to face the men of Troy
and the Trojan women trailing their long robes ...
Someone less of a man than I will say. 'Our Hectorstaking all on his own strength, he destroyed his army!'
So they will mutter. So now, better by far for me
to stand up to Achilles, kill him, come home alive
or die at his hands in glory out before the walls.
But wait-what if I put down my studded shield
and heavy helmet, prop my spear on the rampart
and go forth, just as I am, to meet Achilles,
noble Prince Achilles ...
why, I could promise to give back Helen, yes.
and all her treasures with her, all those riches
Paris once hauled home to Troy in the hollow shipsand they were the cause of all our endless fightingYes, yes, return it all to the sons of Atreus now
to haul away, and then, at the same time, divide
the rest with all the Argives, all the city holds,
and then I'd take an oath for the Trojan royal council
that we will hide nothing! Share and share alike the hoards
our handsome citadel stores within its depths andWhy debate, my friend? Why thrash things out?
I must not go and implore him. He'll show no mercy,
no respect for me, my rights-he'll cut me down
straight otT-stripped of defenses like a woman
once I have loosed the armor ofl'my body.
No way to parley with that man-not nownot from behind some oak or rock to whisper,
like a boy and a young girl, lovers' secrets
a boy and girl might whisper to each other ...
Better to clash in battle, now, at oncesee which fighter Zeus awards the glory!"
So he wavered,
waiting there, but Achilles was closing on him now
)ike the god of war, the fighter'S helmet flashing,
over his right shoulder shaking the Pelian ash spear,

545

130

140

1'0

546

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

that terror, and the bronze around his body flared
like a raging fire or the rising, blazing sun.
Hector looked up, saw him, started to tremble,
nerve gone, he could hold his ground no longer,
he left the gates behind and away he fled in fearand Achilles went for him, fast, sure of his speed
as the wild mountain hawk, the quickest thing on wings,
launching smoothly, swooping down on a cringing dove
and the dove flits out from under, the hawk screaming
over the quarry, plunging over and over, his fury
driving him down to beak and tear his kiIlso Achilles flew at him, breakneck on in fury
with Hector fleeing along the walls of Troy,
fast as his legs would go. On and on they raced,
passing the lookout point, passing the wild fig tree
tossed by the wind, always out from under the ramparts
down the wagon trail they careered until they reached
the clear running springs where whirling Scamander
rises up from its double wellsprings bubbling strongand one runs hot and the steam goes up around it,
drifting thick as if fire burned at its tore
but the other even in summer gushes cold
as hail or freezing snow or water chilled to ice . . .
And here, dose to the springs, lie washing-pools
scooped out in the hollow rocks and broad and smooth
where the wives of Troy and all their lovely daughters
would wash their glistening robes in the old days,
the days of peace before the sons of Achaea came ...
Past these they raced, one escaping, one in pursuit
and the one who fled was great but the one pursuing
greater, even greater-their pace mounting in speed
since both men strove, not for a sacrificial beast
or oxhide trophy, prizes runners fight for, no,
they raced for the life of Hector breaker of horses.
Like powerful stallions sweeping round the post for trophies,
galloping full stretch with some fine prize at stake,
a tripod, say, or woman offered up at funeral games
for some brave hero fallen-so the two of them

[JJ4-6'ij

160

170

180

190

/165-93/

BOOK 22:



whirled three times around the city of Priam,
sprinting at top speed while all the gods gazed down,
and the father of men and gods broke forth among them now:
"Unbearable-e-a man I love, hunted round his own city walls
and right before my eyes. My heart grieves for Hector.
Hector who burned so many oxen in my honor, rich cuts,
now on the rugged crests of Ida, now on Ilium's heights.
But now, look, brilliant Achilles courses him round
the city of Priam in all his savage, lethal speed.
Come, you immortals, think this through. Decide.
Either we pluck the man from death and save his life
or strike him down at last, here at Achilles' handsfor all his fighting heart."
But immortal Athena,
her gray eyes wide, protested strongly: "Father!
Lord of the lightning, king of the black cloud,
what are you saying? A man, a mere mortal,
his doom sealed long ago? You'd set him free
from all the pains of death?
Do as you pleasebut none of the deathless gods will ever praise you."
And Zeus who marshals the thunderheads replied,
"Courage, Athena, third-born of the gods, dear child.
Nothing I said was meant in earnest, trust me,
I mean you all the good will in the world. Go.
Do as your own impulse bids you. Hold back no more."

547

200

210

220

So he launched Athena already poised for aetiondown the goddess swept from Olympus' craggy peaks.
And swift Achilles kept on coursing Hector, nonstop
as a hound in the mountains starts a fawn from its lair,
hunting him down the gorges, down the narrow glens
and the fawn goes to ground, hiding deep in brush
but the hound comes racing fast, nosing him out
until he lands his kill. So Hector could never throw
Achilles off his trail, the swift racer Achilles-

230

548

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

time and again he'd make a dash for the Dardan Gates,
trying to rush beneath the rock-built ramparts, hoping
men on the heights might save him, somehow, raining spears
but time and again Achilles WOUld intercept him quickly,
heading him off, forcing him out across the plain
and always sprinting "along the city side himselfendless as in a dream . . .
when a man can't catch another fleeing on ahead
and he can never escape nor his rival overtake himso the one could never run the other down in his speed
nor the other spring away. And how could Hector have fled
the fates of death so long? How unless one last time,
one final time Apollo had swept in dose beside him,
driving strength in his legs and knees to race the wind?
And brilliant Achilles shook his head at the armies,
never letting them hurl their sharp spears at Heetorsomeone might snatch the glory, Achilles come in second.
But once they reached the springs for the fourth time,
then Father Zeus held out his sacred golden scales:
in them he placed two fates of death that lays men lowone for Achilles, one for Hector breaker of horserand gripping the beam mid-haft the Father raised it high
and down went Hector's day of doom, dragging him down
to the strong House of Death-and god Apollo left him.
Athena rushed to Achilles, her bright eyes gleaming,
standing shoulder-to-shoulder, winging orders now:
..At last our hopes run high, my brilliant AchillesFather Zeus must love youwe'll sweep great glory back to Achaea's fleet,
we'll kill this Hector, mad as he is for battle!
No way for him to escape us now, no longernot even if Phoebus the distant deadly Archer
goes through torments, pleading fer Hector's life,
groveling over and over before our storming Father Zeus.
But you, you hold your ground and catch your breath,
while I run Hector down and persuade the man
to fight you face-to-face."
So Athens commanded

[194-224J

240

250

260

[224-56]

BOOK 22:



and he obeyed, rejoicing at heart-Achilles stopped,
leaning against his ashen spearshaft barbed in bronze.
And Athena left him there, caught up with Hector at once,
and taking the build and vibrant voice of Deiphobus
stood shoulder-to-shoulder with him, winging orders:
"Dear brother, how brutally swift Achilles hunts youcoursing you round the city of Priam in all his lethal speed!
Come, let us stand our ground together-beat him back."
"Deiphobus!"-Hector, his helmet flashing, called out to her"dearest of all my brothers, all these warring years,
of all the sons that Priam and Hecuba produced!
Now I'm determined to praise you all the more,
you who dared-seeing me in these straitsto venture out from the walls, all for my sake,
while the others stay inside and cling to safety."
The goddess answered quickly, her eyes blazing,
"True, dear brother-how your father and mother both
implored me, time and again, clutching my knees,
and the comrades round me begging me to stay!
Such was the fear that broke them, man for man,
but the heart within me broke with grief for you.
Now headlong on and fight! No letup, no lance spared!
So now, now we'll see if Achilles kills us both
and hauls our bloody armor back to the beaked ships
or he goes down in pain beneath your spear."
Athena luring him on with all her immortal cunningand now, at last, as the two came closing for the kill
it was tall Hector, helmet flashing, who led off:
"No more running from you in fear, Achilles!
Not as before. Three times I fled around
the great city of Priam-I lacked courage then
to stand your onslaught. Now my spirit stirs me
to meet you face-to-face. Now kill or be killed!
Come, we'll swear to the gods, the highest witnessesthe gods will oversee our binding pacts. I swear

549

270

280

290

300

550

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

I will never mutilate you-merciless as you areif Zeus allows me to last it out and tear your life away.
But once I've stripped your glorious arrnor, Achilles,
I will give your body back to your loyal comrades.
Swear you'll do the same."
A swift dark glance
and the headstrong runner answered, "Hector, stopl
You unforgivable, you .., don't talk to me of pacts.
There are no binding oaths between men and lionswolves and lambs can enjoy no meeting of the mindsthey are all bent on hating each other to the death.
So with you and me. No love between us. No truce
till one or the other falls and gluts with blood
Ares who hacks at men behind his rawhide shield.
Come, call up whatever courage you can muster.
Life or death-now prove yourself a spearman.
a daring man of war! No more escape for youAthena will kill you with my spear in just a moment.
Now you'll pay at a stroke for all my comrades' grief,
all you killed in the fury of your spear!"
With that,
shaft poised, he hurled and his spear's long shadow flew
but seeing it coming glorious Hector ducked away,
crouching down, watching the bronze tip fly past
and stab the earth-but Athena snatched it up
and passed it back to Achilles
and Hector the gallant captain never saw her.
He sounded out a challenge to Peleus' princely son:
"You missed, look-the great godlike Achilles!
So you knew nothing at all from Zeus about my deathand yet how sure you were! All bluff, cunning with words,
that's all you are-trying to make me fear you,
lose my nerve, forget my fighting strength.
Well, you'll never plant your lance in my back
as I flee you in fear-plunge it through my chest
as I come charging in, if a god gives you the chance!
But now it's for you to dodge my brazen spear-

{256-86}

no

320

no

1286-3141

BOOK 22:



I wish you'd bury it in your body to the hilt.
How much lighter the war would be for Trojans then
if you, their greatest scourge, were dead and gone!"

551

340

Shaft poised, he hurled and his spear's long shadow flew
and It struck Achilles' shield-a dead-center hitbut off and away it glanced and Hector seethed,
his hurtling spear, his whole arm's power poured
in a wasted shot. He stood there, cast down ...
he had no spear in reserve. So Hector shouted out
to Deiphobus bearing his white shield-with a ringing shout
he called for a heavy lancebut the man was nowhere near him,
vanishedyes and Hector knew the truth in his heart
and the fighter cried aloud, "My time has come!
350
At last the gods have called me down to death.
I thought he was at my side, the hero Deiphobushe's safe inside the walls, Athena's tricked me blind.
And now death, grim death is looming up beside me,
no longer far away. No way to escape it now. This,
this was their pleasure after all, sealed long agoZeus and the son of Zeus, the distant deadly Archerthough often before now they rushed to my defense.
So now I meet my doom. Well let me diebut not without struggle, not without glory, no,
360
in some great clash of arms that even men to come
will hear of down the years!"
And on that resolve
he drew the whetted sword that hung at his side,
tempered, massive, and gathering all his force
he swooped like a soaring eagle
launching down from the dark clouds to earth
to snatch some helpless lamb or trembling hare.
So Hector swooped now, swinging his whetted sword
and Achilles charged too, bursting with rage, barbaric,
370
guarding his chest with the well-wrought blazoned shield,

552

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

[3/4-43/

head tossing his gleaming helmet, four horns strong
and the golden plumes shook that the god of fire
drove in bristling thick along its ridge.
Bright as that star amid the stars in the night sky.
star of the evening, brightest star that rides the heavens,
so fire flared from the sharp point of the spear Achilles
brandished high in his right hand, bent on Hector's death,
scanning his splendid body-where to pierce it best?
The rest of his flesh seemed all encased in armor,
burnished, brazen-Achilles' armor that Hector stripped
from strong Patroclus when he killed him-true,
but one spot lay exposed,
where collarbones lift the neckbone off the shoulders.
the open throat, where the end of life comes quickest-there
as Hector charged in fury brilliant Achilles drove his spear
and the point went stabbing clean through the tender neck
but the heavy bronze weapon failed to slash the windpipeHector could still gasp out some words, some last reply ...
he crashed in the dustgodlike Achilles gloried over him:
"Hector-surely you thought when you stripped Patroclus' arrnor
that you, you would be safe! Never a fear of mefar from the fighting as I was-you fool!
Left behind there, down by the beaked ships
his great avenger waited, a greater man by farthat man was I, and I smashed your strength! And youthe dogs and birds will maul you, shame your corpse
while Achaeans bury my dear friend in glory!"
Struggling for breath, Hector, his helmet flashing,
said, "I beg you, beg you by your life, your parentsdon't let the dogs devour me by the Argive ships!
Wait, take the princely ransom of bronze and gold.
the gifts my father and noble mother will give youbut give my body to friends to carry home again,
so Trojan men and Trojan women can do me honor
with fitting rites of fire once I am dead."

380

390

400

{J44-71/

BOOK 22:



Staring grimly, the proud runner Achilles answered,
"Beg no more, you fawning dog-begging me by my parents!
Would to god my rage, my fury would drive me now
to hack your flesh away and eat you rawsuch agonies you have caused me! Ransom?
No man alive could keep the dog-packs off you,
not if they haul in ten, twenty times that ransom
and pile it here before me and promise fortunes moreno, not even if Dardan Priam should offer to weigh out
your bulk in gold! Not even then will your noble mother
lay you on your deathbed, mourn the son she bore ...
The clogs and birds will rend you-blood and bone!"
At the point of death, Hector, his helmet flashing,
said, "I know you well-I see my fate before me.
Never a chance that 1 could win you over. . .
Iron inside your chest, that heart of yours.
But now beware, or my curse will draw god's wrath
upon 'your head, that day when Paris and lord Apollofor all your fighting heart-destroy you at the Scaean Gates!"
Death cut him short. The end closed in around him.
Flying free of his limbs
his soul went winging down to the House of Death,
wailing his fate, leaving his manhood far behind,
his young and supple strength. But brilliant Achilles
taunted Hector's body, dead as he was, "Die, die!
For my own death, I'll meet it freely-whenever Zeus
and the other deathless gods would like to bring it on!"
With that he wrenched his bronze spear from the corpse.
laid it aside and ripped the bloody armor off the back.
And the other sons of Achaea, running up around him,
crowded closer, all of them gazing wonder-struck
at the build and marvelous, lithe beauty of Hector.
And not a man came forward who did not stab his body,

553

410

420

430

554

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

/371-402/

glancing toward a comrade, laughing: "Ab, look herehow much softer he is to handle now, this Hector,
than when he gutted our ships with roaring fire!"
Standing over him, so they'd gloat and stab his body.
But once he had stripped the corpse the proud runner Achilles
took his stand in the midst of all the Argive troops
and urged them on with a flight of winging orders:
"Friends-lords of the Argives. 0 my captains!
Now that the gods have let me kill this man
who caused us agonies, loss on crushing lossmore than the rest of all their men combinedcome, let us ring their walls in armor, test them,
see what recourse the Trojans still may have in mind.
Will they abandon the city heights with this man fallen?
Or brace for a last, dying stand though Hector's gone?
But wait-what am I saying? Why this deep debate?
Down by the ships a body lies unwept, unburiedPatroclus ... I will never forget him,
not as long as I'm still among the living
and my springing knees will lift and drive me on.
Though the dead forget their dead in the House of Death,
I will remember, even there, my dear companion.
Now,
come, you sons of Achaea, raise a song of triumph!
Down to the ships we march and bear this corpse on highwe have won ourselves great glory. We have brought
magnificent Hector down, that man the Trojans
glorified in their city like a god!"
So he triumphed
and now he was bent on outrage, on shaming noble Hector.
Piercing the tendons, ankle to heel behind both feet,
he knotted straps of rawhide through them both,
lashed them to his chariot, left the head to drag
and mounting the car, hoisting the famous arms aboard,
he whipped his team to a run and breakneck on they flew,
holding nothing back. And a thick cloud of dust rose up
from the man they dragged, his dark hair swirling round

440

4S0

460

470

/402-331

BOOK 22:



555

that head so handsome once, all tumbled low in the dustsince Zeus had given him over to his enemies now
to be defiled in the land of his own fathers.
So his whole head was dragged down in the dust.
And now his mother began to tear her hair ...
she flung her shining veil to the ground and raised
a high, shattering scream, looking down at her son.
Pitifully his loving father groaned and round the king
his people cried with grief and wailing seized the dtyfor all the world as if all Troy were torched and smoldering
down from the looming brows of the citadel to her roots.
Priam's people could hardly hold the old man back,
frantic, mad to go rushing out the Dardan Gates.
He begged them all, groveling in the filth,
crying out to them, calling each man by name,
"Let go, my friends! Much as you care for me,
let me hurry out of the city, make my way,
all on my own, to Achaea's waiting ships!
I must implore that terrible, violent man ...
Perhaps-who knows?-he may respect my age,
may pity an old man. He has a father too,
as old as I am-Peleus sired him once,
Peleus reared him to be the scourge of Troy
but most of all to me-he made my life a hell.
So many sons he slaughtered, just coming into bloom ...
but grieving for all the rest, one breaks my heart the most
and stabbing grief for him will take me down to Deathmy Hector-would to god he had perished in my arms!
Then his mother who bore him-oh so doomed,
she and I could glut ourselves with grief."
So the voice of the king rang out in tears,
the citizens wailed in answer, and noble Hecuba
led the wives of Troy in a throbbing chant of sorrow:
"0 my child-my desolation! How can I go on living?
What agonies must I suffer now, now you are dead and gone?
You were my pride throughout the city night and day-

490

500

556

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

1433-64j

a blessing to us all, the men and women of Troy:
throughout the city they saluted you like a god.
You, you were their greatest glory while you livednow death and fate have seized you, dragged you down!"
Her voice rang out in tears, but the wife of Hector
had not heard a thing. No messenger brought the truth
of how her husband made his stand outside the gates.
She was weaving at her loom, deep in the high halls,
working flowered braiding into a dark red folding robe.
And she called her well-kempt women through the house
to set a large three-legged cauldron over the fire
so Hector could have his steaming hot bath
when he came home from battle-poor woman,
she never dreamed how far he was from bathing,
struck down at Achilles' hands by blazmg-eyed Athena.
But she heard the groans and wails of grieffrom the rampan now
and her body shook, her shuttle dropped to the ground,
she called out to her lovely waiting women, "Quicklytwo of you follow me-I must see what's happened.
That cry-that was Hector's honored mother I heard!
My heart's pounding, leaping up in my throat,
the knees beneath me paralyzed-Oh I know it ...
something terrible's coming down on Priam's children.
Pray god the news will never reach my earsl
Yes but I dread it so-what if great Achilles
has cut my Hector off from the city, daring Hector,
and driven him out across the plain, and all alone?He may have put an end to that fatal headstrong pride
that always seized my Hector-never hanging back
with the main force of men, always charging ahead,
giving ground to no man in his fury!"
So she cried,
dashing out of the royal halls like a madwoman,
her heart racing hard, her women dose behind her.
But once she reached the tower where soldiers massed
she stopped on the rampart, looked down and saw it allsaw him dragged before the city, stallions galloping,

510

520

530

540

1465-94/

BOOK 22:



dragging Hector back to Achaea's beaked warshipsruthless work. The world went black as night
before her eyes, she fainted, falling backward,
gasping away her life breath ...
She flung to the winds her glittering headdress,
the cap and the coronet, braided band and veil,
all the regalia golden Aphrodite gave her once,
the day that Hector, helmet atlash in sunlight.
led her home to Troy from her father's house
with countless wedding gifts to win her heart.
But crowding round her now her husband's sisters
and brothers' wives supported her in their midst,
and she, terrified, stunned to the point of death,
struggling for breath now and coming back to life,
burst out in grief among the Trojan women: "0 HeetorI am destroyed! Both born to the same fate after all!
You, you at Troy in the halls of King Priam1 at Thebes, under the timberline of Places,
Betion's house ... He raised me as a child.
thatman of doom, his daughter just as doomedwould to god he'd never fathered me!
Now you go down
to the House of Death, the dark depths of the earth.
and leave me here to waste away in grief, a widow
lost in the royal halls-and the boy only a baby.
the son we bore together, you and I so doomed.
Hector, what help are you to him, now you are dead?what help is he to you? Think, even if he escapes
the wrenching horrors of war against the Argives,
pain and labor will plague him all his days to come.
Strangers will mark his lands off, stealing his estates.
The day that orphans a youngster cuts him off from friends.
And he hangs his head low, humiliated in every way ...
his cheeks stained with tears, and pressed by hunger
the boy goes up to his father's old companions,
tugging at one man's cloak, another's tunic,
and some will pity him, true,
and one will give him a little cup to drink,

557

550

560

570

580

558

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

(495-5151

enough to wet his lips, not quench his thirst.
But then some bully with both his parents living
beats him from the banquet, fists and abuses flying:
'You, get out-you've got no father feasting with us here!'
And the boy, sobbing, trails home to his widowed mother ...
Astyanax!
And years ago, propped on his father's knee,
he would only eat the marrow, the richest cuts of lamb,
and when sleep came on him and he had quit his play,
cradled warm in his nurse's arms he'd drowse off,
snug in a soft bed, his hean brimmed with joy.
Now what suffering, now he's lost his fatherAstyanax!
The Lord of the City, so the Trojans called him,
because it was you, Hector, you and you alone
who shielded the gates and the long walls of Troy.
But now by the beaked ships, far from your parents.
glistening worms will Wriggle through your flesh,
once the dogs have had their fill of your naked corpsethough we have such stores of clothing laid up in the halls.
fine things, a joy to the eye, the work of women's hands.
Now, by god, I'll burn them all, blazing to the skies!
No use to you now, they'll never shroud your bodybut they will be your glory
burned by the Trojan men and women in your honor!"
Her voice rang out in tears and the women wailed in answer.

590

600

BOOK

TWENTY-THREE

Funeral Games
for Patroclus
So they grieved at Troy while Achaea's troops pulled back.
Once they reached the warships moored at the Hellespont
the contingents scattered, each man to his own ship,
but Achilles still would not dismiss his Myrmidons,
he gave his battle-loving comrades strict commands:
"Charioteers in fast formation-friends to the death!
We must not loose our teams from the war-cars yet.
All in battle-order drive them past Patroclusa cortege will mourn the man with teams and chariots.
These are the solemn honors owed the dead. And then,
after we've eased our hearts with tears and dirge,
we free the teams and all take supper here."
All as one
the armies cried out in sorrow, and Achilles led the chant.
Three times they drove their full-maned stallions round the body,

10

559

560

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

[14-431

Myrmidon soldiers mourning, and among them Thetis stirred
a deep desire to grieve. And the sands grew wet.
the armor of fighting men grew wet with tears,
such bitter longing he roused . . .
Patroclus, that terror who routed Trojans headlong.
Achilles led them now in a throbbing chant of sorrow,
laying his man-killing hands on his great friend's chest:
"Farewell, Patroclus, even there in the House of Death!
Look-all that I promised once I am performing now:
I've dragged Hector here for the dogs to rip him rawand here in front of your flaming pyre I'll cut the throats
of a dozen sons of Troy in all their shining glory,
venting my rage on them for your destruction!"
So he triumphed
and again he was bent on outrage, on shaming noble Hectorhe flung him facedown in the dust beside Patroclus' bier.
And down to the last unit all eased off their armor.
fine burnished bronze, and released their neighing teams
and took their seats by the swift runner Achilles' ship,
Myrmidons in their thousands, and he set before them all
a handsome funeral feast to meet their hearts' desire.
And many pale-white oxen sank on the iron knife,
gasping in slaughter, many sheep and bleating goats
and droves of swine with their long glinting tusks,
succulent, rich with fat. They singed the bristles,
splaying the porkers out across Hephaestus' fire
then poured the blood in cupfuls all around the corpse.
But now their commander, swift Achilles was led away
by Achaea's kings, barely able to bring him roundstill raging for his friend-to feast with Agamemnon.
As soon as the party reached the warlord's tents
they ordered the clear-voiced heralds straightaway
to set a large three-legged cauldron over the fire,
still in hopes of inducing Peleus' royal son
to wash the clotted bloodstains from his body.
He spurned their offer, firmly, even swore an oath:
"No, no, by Zeus-by the highest, greatest god!

20

30

40

50

144-741

BOOK 23:

FUNERAL GAMES FOR PATROClUS

It's sacrilege for a single drop to touch my head
till I place Patroclus on his pyre and heap his mound
and cut my hair for him-for a second grief thisharsh
will never touch my heart while I am still among the living ...
But now let us consent to the feasting that I loathe,
And at daybreak, marshal Agamemnon, rouse your troops
to fell and haul in timber, and furnish all that's fitting,
all the dead man needs for his journey down the western dark.
Then, by heaven, the tireless fire can strike his corpsethe sooner to burn Patrodus from our sightand the men turn back to battles they must wage."
So he insisted. They hung on his words, complied,
rushed to prepare the meal, and each man feasted weIl
and no man's hunger lacked a share of the banquet.
When they had put aside desire for food and drink
each went his way and slept in his own shelter.
But along the shore as battle lines of breakers
crashed and dragged, Achilles lay down now,
groaning deep from the heart,
near his Mynnidon force but alone on open ground
where over and over rollers washed along the shore.
No sooner had sleep caught him, dissolving all his grief
as mists of refreshing slumber poured around him therehis powerful frame was bone-weary from charging Hector
straight and hard to the walls of Windswept Troythan the ghost of stricken Patrodus drifted up ...
He was like the man to the life, every feature,
the same tall build and the fine eyes and voice
and the very robes that used to clothe his body.
Hovering at his head the phantom rose and spoke:
"Sleeping, Achilles? You've forgotten me, my friend.
You never neglected me in life, only now in death.
Bury me, quicklv-s-let me pass the Gates of Hades.
They hold me off at a distance, all the souls,
the shades of the burnt-out, breathless dead,
never to let me cross the river, mingle with them ...
They leave me to wander up and down, abandoned, lost

561

60

70

80

562

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

at the House of Death with the all-embracing gates.
Oh give me your hand-I beg you with my tears!
Never, never again shall I return from Hades
once you have given me the soothing rites of fire.
Never again will you and I, alive and breathing,
huddle side-by-side, apart from loyal comrades,
making plans together-never ... Grim death,
that death assigned from the day that I was born
has spread its hateful jaws to take me down.
And you too,
your fate awaits you too, godlike as you are, Achillesto die in battle beneath the proud rich Trojans' walls!
But one thing more. A last request-grant it, please.
Never bury my bones apart from yours, Achilles,
let them lie together ...
just as we grew up together in your house,
after Menoetius brought me there from Opois,
and only a boy, but banished for bloody murder
the day I killed Amphidarnas' son. I was a foolI never meant to kill him-quarreling over a dice game.
Then the famous horseman Peleus took me into his halls,
he reared me with kindness, appointed me your aide.
So now let a single urn, the gold two-handled urn
your noble mother gave you, hold our bones-together!"

(74-103/

90

100

110

And the swift runner Achilles reassured him warmly:
"Why have you returned to me here, dear brother, friend?
Why tell me of all that I must do? I'll do it all.
I will obey you, your demands. Oh come closer!
Throw our arms around each other, just for a momenttake some joy in the tears that numb the heart!"
In the same breath he stretched his loving arms
but could not seize him, no, the ghost slipped underground
like a wisp of smoke .., with a high thin cry.
And Achilles sprang up with a start and staring wide,
drove his fists together and cried in desolation, "Ah god!
So even in Death's strong house there is something left,

120

{104-37{

BOOK 23:

FUNERAL GAMES FOR PATROCL1:IS

a ghost, a phantom-true, but no real breath of life.
All night long the ghost of stricken Patroclus
hovered over me, grieving, sharing warm tears.
telling me, point by point, what I must do.
Marvelous-like the man to the life!"
So he cried
and his outcry stirred in them all a deep desire to grieve,
and Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone upon them weeping
round the wretched corpse. At daybreak King Agamemnon
ordered patties of men and mules to haul in timber,
pouring from the tents with a good man in charge.
the lordly Idomeneus' aide-in-arms Meriones.
The troops moved out with loggers' axes in hand
and sturdy cabled ropes as mules trudged on ahead.
Uphill, downhill, crisscross, zigzag on they tramped
and once they reached the slopes of lda with all her springs,
quickly pitching themselves at towering, leaf-crowned oaks,
they put their backs into strokes of the whetted bronze axes
and huge trunks came crashing down. They split them apart,
lashed the logs to the mules and their hoofs tore up the earth,
dragging them down to level ground through dense brush.
And all the woodcutters hoisted logs themselvesby command of Idomeneus' good aide Merionesand they heaved them down in rows along the beach
at the site Achilles chose to build an immense mound
for Patroclus and himself.
With boundless timber piled
on all sides of the place, down they sat, waiting, massed.
And at once Achilles called his Myrmidons keen for battle:
"Belt yourselves in bronze I Each driver yoke his team!
Chariots harnessed!" Up they rose and strapped on armor
and swung aboard the war-cars, drivers, fighters beside themand the horse moved out in front, behind came clouds of infantry,
men by thousands, and in their midst his comrades bore Patroclus.
They covered his whole body deep with locks of hair they cut
and cast upon him, and just behind them brilliant Achilles
held the head, in tears-this was his steadfast friend
whom he escorted down to the House of Death.

563

130

140

1'0

564

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

When they reached the site Achilles had pointed out
they laid Patrodus down and swittlv built his body
a fitting height of timber.
And now the great runner remembered one more duty.
Stepping back from the pyre he cut the red-gold lock
he'd let grow long as a gift to the river god Spercheusscanning the wine-dark sea he prayed in anguish, "Spercheusl
All in vain my father Peleus vowed to you that there,
once I had journeyed home to my own dear fatherland,
I'd cut this lock for you and offer splendid victims,
dedicate fifty young ungelded rams to your springs,
there at the spot where your grove and smoking altar stand!
So the old king vowed-but you've destroyed his hopes.
Now, since 1 shall not return to my fatherland,
I'd give my friend this lock ...
and let the hero Patroclus bear it on his way."
With that,
Achilles placed the lock in his dear comrade's hands
and stirred in the men again a deep desire to grieve.
And now the sunlight would have set upon their tears
if Achilles had not turned to Agamemnon quickly:
"Atrides-you are the first the armies will obey.
Even of sorrow men can have their fill. So now
dismiss them from the pyre, have them prepare
an evening meal. We are the closest to the dead,
we'll see to all things here.
But I'd like the leading captains to remain."
Hearing his wish, the lord of men Agamemnon
dismissed the troops at once to the balanced ships.
But the chief mourners stayed in place, piled timber
and buih .., pyre a hundred feet in length and breadth
and aloft it laid the corpse with heavy, aching hearts.
And droves of fat sheep and shambling crook-horned cattle
they led before the pyre, skinned and dressed them well.
And the greathearted Achilles, flensing fat from all,
wrapped the corpse with folds of it head to foot.
then heaped the flayed carcasses round Patrodus.

{138-69/

160

170

180

190

/l70-20J/

BOOK 23:

FUNERAL GAMES FOR PATROCLUS

565

He set two-handled jars of honey and oil beside him,
leaned them against the bier-and then with wild zeal
slung the bodies of four massive stallions onto the pyre
and gave a wrenching groan. And the dead lord Patroclus
had fed nine dogs at table-he slit the throats of two,
threw them onto the pyre and then a dozen brave sons
of the proud Trojans he hacked to pieces with his bronze ...
Achilles' mighty heart was erupting now with slaughterhe loosed the iron rage of fire to consume them all
and cried out, calling his dear friend by name,
"Farewell, Patrodus, even there in the House of Death!
All that I promised once I have performed at last.
Here are twelve brave sons of the proud Trojansall, the fire that feeds on you devours them all
but not Hector the royal son of Priam, Hector
I will never give to the hungry flameswild dogs will bolt his flesh!"
So he threatened
but the dogs were not about to feed on Hector.
Aphrodite daughter of Zeus beat off the packs,
day and night, anointing Hector's body with oil,
ambrosial oil of roses, so Achilles could not rip
the prince's skin as he dragged him back and forth.
And round him Phoebus Apollo brought a dark cloud down
from high sky to the plain to shroud the entire space
where Hector's body lay, before the sun's white fury
could sear away his flesh, his limbs and sinews.

220

But the pyre of dead Patroclus was not bumingand the swift runner Achilles thought of what to do.
Stepping back from the pyre he prayed to the two windsZephyr and Boreas, West and North-promised splendid victims
and pouring generous, brimming cups from a golden goblet.
begged them to come, so the wood might burst in flame
and the dead bum down to ash with all good speed.
And Iris, hearing his prayers, rushed the message on
to the winds that gathered now in stormy Zephyr's halls
to share his brawling banquet. Iris swept to a stop

230

200

210

566

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

and once they saw her poised at the stone threshold
all sprang up, each urged her to sit beside him
but she refused, pressing on with her message:
"No time for sitting now. No, I must return
to the Ocean's running stream, the Aethiopians' land.
They are making a splendid sacrifice to the godsI must not miss my share of the sacred feast.
But I bring Achilles' prayers!
He begs you to come at once, Boreas, blustering Zephyr,
he promises splendid victims-come with a strong blast
and light the pyre where Patroclus lies in state
and all the Argive armies mourn around him!"
Message delivered, off she sped as the winds rose
with a superhuman roar, stampeding clouds before them.
Suddenly reaching the open sea in gale force,
whipping whitecaps under a shrilling killer-squall
they raised the good rich soil of Troy and struck the pyre
and a huge inhuman blaze went howling up the skies.
All night long they hurled the flames-massed on the pyre,
blast on screaming blast-and all night long the swift Achilles.
lifting a two-handled cup, dipped wine from a golden bowl
and poured it down on the ground and drenched the earth,
calling out to the ghost of stricken, gaunt Patroclus,
As a father weeps when he bums his son's bones,
dead on his wedding day,
and his death has plunged his parents in despair ...
so Achilles wept as he burned his dear friend's bones,
dragging himself around the pyre, choked with sobs.
At that hour the morning star comes rising up
to herald a new day on earth, and riding in its wake
the Dawn flings out her golden robe across the sea.
the funeral fires sank low, the flames died down.
And the winds swung round and headed home again,
over the Thracian Sea, and the heaving swells moaned.
And at last Achilles, turning away from the corpse-fire,
sank down, exhausted. Sweet sleep overwhelmed him.

[202-32/

240

250

260

/233-63/

BOOK 23:

FUNER"AL GAMES FOR PATROCLUS

But Agamemnon's followers grouped together now
and as they approached Achilles
the din and trampling of their feet awoke him.
He sat up with a start and made his wishes known:
Atrides-<:hiefs of Achaea's united forcesfirst put out the fires with glistening wine,
wherever the flames still bum in all their fury.
Then Jet us collect the bones of Menoetius' son Patroclus,
pick them out with care-but they cannot be mistaken:
he lay amidst the pyre, apart from all the others
burned at the edge, the ruck of men and horses.
Then let us place his bones in a golden urn,
sealed tight and dry with a double fold of fat,
till I myself lie hid in the strong House of Death.
For his barrow, build him nothing large, I ask you,
something right for the moment. And then, later,
Achaeans can work to make it broad and lofty,
all who survive me here.
alive in the benched ships when I am gone."

567

270

U

And the men obeyed the swift runner's orders.
They first put out the fires with glistening wine,
far as the flames had spread and the ashes bedded deep.
In tears they gathered their gentle comrade's white bones,
all in a golden urn, sealed with a double fold of fat,
and stowed the urn in his shelter, covered well
with a light linen shroud, then laid his barrow out.
Around the pyre they planted a ring of stone revetments.
piled the loose earth high in a mound above the ring
and once they'd heaped the barrow turned to leave.
But Achilles held the armies on the spot.
He had them sit in a great and growing circlenow for funeral games-and brought from his ships
the trophies for the contests: cauldrons and tripods,
stallions, mules and cattle with massive heads,
women sashed and lovely, and gleaming gray iron.
First.
for the fastest charioteers he set out glittering prizes:

280

290

300

568

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

a woman to lead away, flawless, skilled in crafts,
and a two-eared tripod, twenty-two measures deepall that for the first prize.
Then for the runner-up he brought forth a mare,
unbroken, six years old, with a mule foal in her womb.
For the third he produced a fine four-measure cauldron
never scorched by flames, its sheen as bright as new.
For the fourth he set out two gold bars, for the fifth,
untouched by fire as well, a good two-handled jar..
And he rose up tall and challenged all the Argives:
"Atrides-Achaeans-at-arms! Let the games beginI
The trophies lie afield-they await the charioteers.
If we held our games now in another hero's honor,
surely I'd walk off to my tent with first prize.
You know how my team outstrips all others' speed.
Immortal horses they are, Poseidon gave them himself
to my father Peleus, Peleus passed them on to me.
But I and our fast stallions will not race today,
so strong his fame, the charioteer they've lost,
so kind-always washing them down with fresh water,
sleeking their long manes with smooth olive oil.
No wonder they stand here, mourning ...
look, trailing those very manes along the ground.
They both refuse to move, saddled down with grief.
But all the rest of you, come, all Achaeans in camp
who trust to your teams and bolted chariotstake your places now!"
Achilles' call rang out
and it brought the fastest drivers crowding forward.
The first by far, Eumelus lord of men sprang up,
Admetus' prized son who excelled in horsemanship
and following him Tydides, powerful Diomedes,
yoking the breed of Tros he'd wrested from Aeneas
just the other day when Apollo saved their master.
Then Atreus' son Menelaus, the red-hatred captain
born of the gods, leading under the yoke his racers,
Blaze, Agamemnon's mare, and his own stallion Brightfoot.
Anchlses' son Echepolus gave Agamemnon Blaze,

/26)-96/

JIO

320

HO

FUNERAL GAMES FOR PATROClUS

569

a gift that bought him off from the king's armies
bound for Windy Troy: he'd stay right where he was,
a happy man, since Zeus had given him vast wealth
and he lived in style on Sicyon's broad dancing rings.
His was the mare Atrides harnessed, champing for the race.
And the fourth to yoke his full-maned team was Antilochus,
the splendid son of Nestor the old high-hearted king,
lord Neleus' offspring. A team of Pylian purebreds
drew his chariot. His father stood at his side,
lending sound advice to the boy's own good sense:
"Young as you are, Antilochus, how the gods have loved you!
Zeus and Poseidon taught you horsemanship, every sort,
so there's no great need for me to set you straight.
Well you know how to double round the post ...
but you've got the slowest nags-a handicap, I'd say.
Yet even if other teams are faster, look at their drivers:
there's not a trick in their whips that you don't have at hand.
So plan your attack, my friend, muster all your skills
or watch the prize slip by!
It's skill, not brawn, that makes the finest woodsman.
By skill, too, the captain holds his ship on course,
scudding the wine-dark sea though rocked by gales.
By skill alone, charioteer outraces charioteer.
The average driver, leaving all to team and car.
recklessly makes his turn, veering left and right,
his pair swerving over the course-he can't control them.
But the cunning driver, even handling slower horses,
always watches the post, turns it dose, never loses
the first chance to relax his reins and stretch his pair
but he holds them tight till then, eyes on the leader.
Now, the turn itself-it's clear, you cannot miss it.
There's a dead tree-stump standing six feet high.
it's oak or pine, not rotted through by the rains,
and it's propped by two white stones on either side.
That's your halfway mark where the homestretch starts
and there's plenty of good smooth racing-room around itit's either the grave-mound of a man dead long ago
or men who lived before us set it up as a goal.

340

[Z97-JJZ[

BOOK 23:

350

360

370

570

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

Now, in any event, swift Achilles makes it
his turning-post. And you must hug it close
as you haul your team and chariot round but you
in your tight-strung car, you lean to the left yourself,
just a bit as you whip your right-hand horse, hard,
shout him on, slacken your grip and give him rein.
But make your left horse hug that post so close
the hub of your well-turned wheel will almost seem
to scrape the rock-just careful not to graze it!
You'll maim your team, you'll smash your car to pieces.
A joy to your rivals, rank disgrace to yourself ...
So keep your head, my boy, be on the lookout.
Trail the field out but pass them all at the post.
no one can catch you then or overtake you with a surge-not if the man behind you were driving huge Arion,
Adrastus' lightning stallion sired by the gods.
or Lacmedon's team, the greatest bred in Troy."

{JJJ-62]

380

390

Nestor sat down again. He'd shown his son the ropes.
the last word in the master horseman's skills.
Now after Meriones yoked his sleek horses fifth,
they boarded their cars and dropped lots in a helmet.
Achilles shook it hard-Antilochus' lot leapt out
so he drew the inside track.
Next in the draw came hardy lord Bumelus.
Atrides Menelaus the famous spearman next
and Meriones drew the fourth starting-lane
and Tydides Dlornedes drew the fifth and last,
the best of them all by far at driving battle-teams.
All pulled up abreast as Achilles pointed out the post,
far off on the level plain, and stationed there beside it
an umpire, old lord Phoenix, his father's aide-in-arms,
to mark the field at the turn and make a true report.

400

Readywhips raised highat the signal all together

410

[362-991

BOOK 23:

FUNERAL GAMES FOR PATROCLUS

lashed their horses' backs and shouted, urging them onthey broke in a burst of speed, in no time swept the plain,
leaving the ships behind and lifting under their chests
the dust clung to the teams like clouds or swirling gales
as their manes went streaming back in the gusty tearing wind.
The cars shot on, now jouncing along the earth that rears us all,
now bounding clear in the air but the drivers kept erect
in the lurching cars and the heart of each man raced,
straining for victory-each man yelled at his pair
as they flew across the plain in a whirl of dust.
But just out of the turn,
starting the homestretch back to sunlit sea
the horses lunged, each driver showed his form,
the whole field went racing full tilt and at once
the fast mares of Eumelus surged far out in frontAnd after him came Dlomedes' team, Tros's stallions
hardly a length behind now, dosing at each stride
and at any moment it seemed they'd mount Eumelus' car,
their hot breath steaming his back and broad shoulders,
their heads hovering over him, breakneck on they flewand now he'd have passed him or forced a dead heat
if Apollo all of a sudden raging at Diomedes
had not knocked the shining whip from his fist.
Tears of rage came streaming down his cheeks
as he watched Eumelus' mares pulling farther ahead
and his team losing pace, no whip to lash them on ...
But Athena, missing nothing of Phoebus' foul play
that robbed Diomedes, sped to the gallant captain,
handed him back his whip, primed his team with power
and flying after Admetus' son in full immortal fury
the goddess smashed his yoke. His mares bolted apart,
careening off the track and his pole plowed the ground
and Eumelus hurled from the chariot, tumbling over the wheel,
the skin was ripped from his elbows, mouth and nostrils,
his forehead battered in, scraped raw at the brows,
tears filling his eyes, his booming voice chokedBut veering round the wreck Diomedes steered his racers
shooting far ahead of the rest, leaving them in the dust

571

420

430

440

572

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

as Athena fired his team and gave the man his glory.
And after him came Atrides, red-haired Menelaus,
next Antilochus, urging his father's horses:
"Drive, the two of you-full stretch and fast!
I don't tell you to match the leader's speed,
skilled Diomedes' team-look, Athena herself
just fired their pace and gave their master glory.
But catch Menelaus' pair-fast-don't get left behindor Blaze will shower the two of you with disgraceBlaze is a mare! Why falling back, my brave ones?
I warn you both-so help me it's the truthno more grooming for you at Nestor's hands!
The old driver will slaughter you on the spot
with a sharp bronze blade if you slack off now
and we take a lesser prize. After them, fasterfull gallop-I'll find the way, I've 'got the skill
to slip past him there where the track narrowsI'll never miss my chance!"
Whipped with fear
by their master's threats they put on a fresh burst
for a length or two but suddenly brave Antilochus
saw the narrow place where the road washed OUla sharp dip in the land where massing winter rains
broke off the edge, making it all one sunken rut.
There Atrides was heading-no room for two abreastbut Antilochus swerved to pass him, lashing his horses
off the track then swerving into him neck-and-neck
and Atrides, frightened, yelled out at the man,
AntiJochus-you drive like a maniac! Hold your horses!
The track's too narrow here-it widens soon for passingwatch out-you'll crash your chariot wreck us both!"

/399-434/

450

460

470

U

So he cried but Antilochus drove on all the wilder,
cracking his lash for more speed like a man stone deaf.
As far as a full shoulder-throw of a whirling discus
hurled by a young contender testing out his strength,
so far they raced dead even. But then Menelaus' pair
dropped back as he yielded, cut the pace on purpose-

480

{4J5-66!

BOOK 23:

FUNERAL GAMES FOR PATROCLUS

he feared the massive teams would collide on the track
and the tight-strung cars capsize, the men themselves
go sprawling into the dust, striving, wild for triumph.
As his rival passed the red-haired captain cursed him:
"Antilochus-no one alive more treacherous than you!
Away with you, madman-damn you!
How wrong we were when we said you had good sense.
You'll never take the prize unless you take the oath!"
Turning back to his team, calling, shouting them on:
"Don't hold back don't stop now-galled as you arethat team in the lead will sag in the leg before yourobbed of their prime, their racing days are done!"
And lashed with fear by their master's angry voice
they put on a surge, closing on them fast.
And all the while
the armies tense in a broad circle watched for horses
flying back on the plain in a rising whirl of dust. .
The first to make them out was the Cretan captain.
Idomeneus sat perched on a rise outside the ring,
a commanding lookout point, and hearing a driver
shouting out in the distance, recognized the voice,
could see a stallion too-far in the lead, unmistakablea big chestnut beauty, all but the blaze he sported
stark white on his forehead, round as a full moon.
He sprang to his feet, calling down to cohorts,
"Friends-lords of the Argives, 0 my captainsam I the only one who can spot that pair
or can you see them too?
Seems to me it's a new team out in front,
a new driver as well, just coming into sight.
The mares of Eumelus must have come to grief.
somewhere downfield-they led on the way out.
I saw them heading first for the turn, by god,
but I can't find them now-anywhere-hard as I look,
left and right, scanning the whole Trojan plain.
He lost his reins, he lost control of his horses
round the post and they failed to make the turn-

573

490

500

510

520

574

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

/467-98/

that's where he got thrown, I'd say, his chariot smashed
and his horses went berserk and bolted off.
Stand up,
look for yourselves! I can't make them out ...
not for certain, no, but the leader seems to me
an Aetolian man by birth-he's king of the Argives,
horse-breaking Tydeus' son, rugged Diomedesl"
But quick Little Ajax rounded on him roughly:
"Loose talk, Idomeneus-why are you always sounding off?
They still have a way to go out there, those racing teams.
You too, you're a far cry from the youngest Argive here,
nor are the eyes in your head our sharpest scouts
but you're always blustering, you, you foul-mouthedwhy must we have you blurting out this way
in the face of keener men?
Those mares in front are the same that led before-they're Eumelus' mares, look, and there's Eumelus now,
astride his chariot, gripping the reins hlmselfl"
But the Cretan captain burst back in answer,
"Ajax, champion wrangler in all the ranks! Stupid too,
first and last the worst man in the Argive armiesstubborn, bullnecked fool. Come now,
let's both put up a tripod or a cauldron,
wager which horses are really out in front
and we'll make Atrides Agamemnon our refereeyou'll learn, don't worry, once you pay the price!"
Ajax rose in fury to trade him taunt for taunt,
and now the two of them might have come to blows
if Achilles himself had not stood up to calm them:
"Enough! No more trading your stinging insults now,
Ajax, Idomeneus! It's offensive-this is not the time. .
You'd be the first to blame a man who railed this way.
Sit down in the ring, you two, and watch the horsesthey'll be home in a moment, racing hard to win.
Then each can see for himself who comes in second,

530

540

550

f498-Hl/

BOOK H:

FUNERAL GAMES FOR PATROCLUS

575

who takes off first prize."
In the same breath
Diomedes came on storming toward them-e-closer, look,
dosing-lashing his team nonstop, full-shoulder strokes,
making them kick high as they hurtled toward the goal.
Constant sprays of dust kept pelting back on the driver,
the chariot sheathed in gold and tin careering on
in the plunging stallions' wake, its spinning rims
hardly leaving a rut behind in the thin dust
as the team thundered in-a whirlwind finish!
He reined them back in the ring with drenching sweat,
lather streaming down to the ground from necks and chests.
Their master leapt down from the bright burnished car,
propped his whip on the yoke. His aide lost no timethe hardy Sthenelus rushed to collect the prizes,
gave their proud troops the woman to lead away
and they carried off the handsome two-eared tripod
as he was loosing the horses from the harness ...
Antilochus next-the son of Nestor drove in second,
beating Atrides not by speed but cunningbut still Menelaus kept his racers close behind.
Tight as the closing gap between the wheel and horse
when he hauls his master's car top speed across the flats,
the very tip of his tail brushing the running-rim
and the wheel spins closer, hardly a gap between
as he sweeps the open plain-that much, no more,
Menelaus trailed Antilochus, dauntless driver.
At first he'd trailed him a full discus-throw
but now he was closing, gaining on him fastyes, Blaze with all her fury and flowing mane,
Agarnemnon's mare was coming on with a strong surge
and now if the two teams had a longer course to run
Menelaus would have passed him-no dead heat about it.
Then Idorneneus' good aide Meriones came in fourth,
trailing the famed Atrides by a spear-throw.
His team had sleek manes but the slowest pace afield
and the man himself was the poorest racing-driver.

560

570

580

590

576

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

But Admetus' son Eumelus came in last of all ...
dragging his fine chariot, flogging his team before him.
Seeing him there the swift Achilles filled with pity,
rose in their midst and said these winging words:
"The best man drives his purebred team home last!
Come, let's give him a prize, it's only rightbut second prize, of course-Tydeus' son must carry off the first."
So he said
and the armies called assent to what he urged.
And now, spurred by his comrades' quick approval,
Achilles was just about to give the man the mare
when Antilochus, son of magnanimous old Nestor,
leapt to his feet and lodged a formal protest:
"Achilles-I'll be furious if you carry out that plan I
Do you really mean to strip me of my prize?so concerned that his team and car were wrecked.
and the fellow too, for all his racing skills.
Why, he should have prayed to the deathless godsl
Then he would never have finished last of all.
You pity the man? You're fond of him, are you?
You have hoards of gold in your tents, bronze, sheep,
serving-girls by the score and purebred racers too:
pick some bigger trophy out of the whole lot
and hand it on to the man, but do it lateror now, at once, and win your troops' applause.
I won't give up the mare! The one who wants herstep this way and tryhe'll have to fight me for her with his fists!"
He flared up and the swift runner Achilles smiled,
delighting in Antilochus-he liked the man immensely.
He answered him warmly, winged words: "Antilochus,
you want me to fetch an extra gift from my tents,
a consolation prize for Eumelus? I'm glad to do it.
I'll give him the breastplate I took from Asteropaeus.
It's solid bronze with a glittering overlay of tin,
rings on rings. A gifl he'll value highly."

/532-62/

600

610

620

/563-95/

BOOK 23:

FUNERAL GAMES FOR PATROCLUS

577

He asked Automedon, ready aide, to bring
the breastplate from his tents. He went and brought it,
handed it to Eumelus. The man received it gladly.
But now Menelaus rose, his heart smoldering,
still holding a stubborn grudge against Antilochus.
A crier put a staff in his hands and called for silence.
And with all his royal weight Atrides thundered. "Antilochusyou used to have good sense! Now see what you've done!
Disgraced my horsemanship-you've fouled my horses,
cutting before me, you with your far slower team.
Quickly, lords of the Argives, all my captains,
judge between us-impartially, no favoritismso none of our bronze-armed men can ever say,
'Only with lies did Atrides beat Antilochus out
and walk off with the mare-his team was far slower
but the king's own rank and power took the prize!'
Wait, I'll settle things myself. I have no fear
that any Achaean will accuse me: I'll be fair.
Come over here, Antilochus, royal princethis is the old custom. Come, stand in front
of your team and chariot, grasp the coiling whip
that lashed them home, lay your hand on their manes
and swear by the mighty god who grips and shakes the earth
you never blocked my chariot-not by deliberate foul."
Antilochus came to his senses, backed off quickly:
"No more, please. I am much younger than you are.
lord Menelaus-you're my senior, you the greater man.
Well you know how the whims of youth break all the rules.
Our wits quicker than wind, our judgment just as flighty.
Bear with me now. I'll give you this mare I wonof my own accord. And any finer trophy you'd ask
from my own stores, I'd volunteer at once,
gladly, Atrides, my royal king-anything
but fall from your favor all my days to come
and swear a false oath in the eyes of every god."

630

640

650

660

578

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

With that the son of magnanimous old Nestor
led the mare and turned her over to Menelaus' hands.
And his heart melted now like the dew that wets the corn
when the fresh stalks rise up and the ripe fields rippleso the heart in your chest was melted now, Menelaus,
and you gave your friend an answer, winged words:
"Antilochus, now it is my turn to yield to you,
for all my mounting anger . . ~
you who were never wild or reckless in the past.
It's only youth that got the better of your discretion,
just this once-but the next time be more careful.
Try to refrain from cheating your superiors.
No other Achaean could have brought me round so soon,
but seeing that you have suffered much and labored long,
your noble father, your brother too-all for my sakeI'll yield to your appeal. I'll even give you the mare,
though she is mine, so our people here will know
the heart inside me is never rigid, unrelenting."
He handed back the mare to Antilochus' man.
Noernon led her off while Atrides took instead
the polished cauldron bright in all its sheen.
Meriones, who had come in fourth took fourth prize,
the two bars of gold. That left the fifth unclaimed,
the jar with double handles. Bearing it through the crowd
Achilles gave it to Nestor, standing close beside him,
urging, "Here, old friend-a trophy for you too!
Lay it away as a treasure ...
let it remind you of the burial of Patrodus.
Never again will you see him among the Argives.
I give you this prize, a gift for giving's sake,
for now you will never fight with fists or wrestle,
or enter the spear-throw, or race on sprinting feet.
The burdens of old age already weigh you down."
And Achilles placed the trophy in Nestor's hands.
He thrilled to have it and spoke out winging words:
"True, true, my son, all of it, right on the mark.

[596-626J

670

680

690

/627-57/

BOOK B:

FUNERAL GAMES FOR PATROClUS

My legs no longer firm, my friend, dead on my feet,
nor do my arms go shooting from my shouldersthe stunning punch, the left and right are gone.
Oh make me young again, and the strength inside me
steady as a rock! As fresh as I was that day
the Epeans buried lord Amarynceus in Buprasion
and his sons held games to celebrate the king ...
No one could match me there, none among the Bpeans,
not even our own Pylians, or Aetolia's hardy men.
At boxing I destroyed Clytomedes, Enops' boy.
Ancaeus of Pleuron wrestled against me-down he went.
Fast as Iphidus was, I raced him to his knees,
with a spear I outhurled Phyleus, Polydorus too.
Only at chariot-racing the sons of Actor beat metwo against one, cutting before me, hellbent to win,
for the biggest prize was left for the last event.
But it took twins-one with the reins rock-steady,
holding them rock-steady, the other lashed the team.
So that's the man I was .., but now's the time
for the younger men to lock in rough encounters,
time for me to yield to the pains of old age.
But there was a day I shone among the champions.
Well,
you must get on with your friend's burial nowthe games must go onbut I accept this gladly, myoId heart rejoices.
You never forget my friendship, never miss a chance
to pay me the honor I deserve among our comrades.
For all that you have done for me, Achilles,
may the immortals fill your cup with joy!"
He savored every word of Nestor's story.
Then Achilles made his way through crowds of troops
and set out prizes next for the bruising boxing-match.
lie fetched and tethered a heavy-duty mule in the ring,
six years old, unbroken-the hardest kind to breakand offered the loser a cup with double handles.
He rose up tall and challenged all the Argives:

579

700

710

720

730

580

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

/658-90}

"Son of Atreus-e-all you Achaean men-at-arms!
We invite two men-our best-to compete for these.
Put up your fists, fight for what you're worth.
The man that Apollo helps outlast the otherclearly witnessed here by Achaea's armieshe takes this beast of burden back to his tents
but the one he beats can have the two-eared cup."
And a powerful, huge man loomed up at once,
Panopeus' son Bpeus, the famous boxing champion.
He clamped a hand on the draft mule and shouted,
"Step right up and get it-whoever wants that cup!
This mule is mine, I tell you. No Achaean in sight
will knock me out and take her-I am the greatest!
So what if I'm not a world-class man of war?
How can a man be first in all events?
I warn you, soldiers-so help me it's the truthI'll crush you with body-blows, I'll crack your ribs to splinters!
You keep your family mourners near to cart you offonce my fists have worked you down to pulp!"
Dead silence. So the armies met his challenge.
Only Buryalus rose to take him on, heroic volunteer,
bred of Talaus' blood and a son of King Mecisteus
who went to Thebes in the old days, when Oedipus fell,
and there at his funeral games defeated all the Thebans.
The spearman Diomedes served as the man's second,
goading him on, intent to see him win.
First he cinched him round witfl the boxer's belt
then taking rawhide thongs, cut from a field-ox,
wrapped his knuckles well.
Both champions, belted tight,
stepped into the ring squared ofi'at each other and let loose,
trading jabs with their clenched fists then slugged it outflurries of jolting punches, terrific grinding of jaws,
sweat rivenng, bodies glistening-suddenly Euryalus
glanced for an opening, dropped his guard and Epeus hurled
his smashing roundhouse hook to the head-a knockout blow!

740

750

760

{690-724/

BOOK 23:

FUNERAL GAMES FOR PATROClUS

He could keep his feet no longer, knees caved in on the spotas under the ruffling North Wind a fish goes arching up
and flops back down on a beach-break strewn with seaweed
and a dark wave blacks him out. So he left his feet
and down he went-out cold-but big-hearted Epeus
hoisted him in his arms and stood him upright.
A band of loyal followers rushed to help him,
led him out of the ring, his feet dragging,
head lolling to one side, spitting clots of blood ...
still senseless after they propped him in their corner,
and they had to fetch the two-eared cup themselves.
Quickly
Achilles displayed before the troops the prizes set
for the third event, the grueling wrestling-match.
For the winner a large tripod made to stride a fire
and worth a dozen oxen, so the soldiers reckoned,
For the loser he led a woman through their midst,
worth four, they thought, and skilled in many crafts.
And he rose up tall and challenged all the Achaeans:
"Now two come forward-fight to win this prize!"
And the giant Ajax got to his feet at once,
Odysseus stood up too,
an expert at every subtle, cunning hold.
Both champions, belted tight, stepped into the ring
and grappling each other hard with big burly arms,
locked like rafters a master builder bolts together,
slanting into a pitched roof to fight the ripping winds.
And their backbones creaked as scuffling hands tugged
for submission-holds and sweat streamed down their spines
and clusters of raw welts broke out on ribs and shoulders
slippery, red with blood, and still they grappled, harder,
locking for victory, locked for that burnished tripod:
Odysseus no more able to trip and bring to ground
his man than Ajax could-Odysseus' brawn held out.
A stalemate. And the troops were growing bored,
so at last the giant Ajax spurred his rival,
grunting, "Son of Laenes-resourceful one, enoughyou hoist me or I hoist you-and leave the rest to Zeus."

581

770

780

790

800

582

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

(725-56/

As Ajax heaved him up Odysseus never missed a trickhe kicked him behind the knee, clipping the hollow,
cut his legs from under him, knocked him backwardpinned as Odysseus flung himself across his chest!
That roused the crowd, they leaned to look and marveled.
The next throw now-long-enduring Odysseus' turn ...
he tried to hoist Great Ajax, budged him a little
off the ground, true, but he could not heave him clear,
then hooked him round a knee and down they sprawled together,
both men clenched in a death-lock, tussling round in dust.
And now they'd have jumped up, gone for the third fall
if Achilles himself had not stepped in and stopped them:
"No more struggling-don't kill yourselves in sport!
Victory goes to both. Share the prizes. Off you go,
so the rest of the men can have a crack at contests."

810

820

And they listened gladly, nodding at his decision,
wiped the dust from their backs and pulled their shirts on.
Achilles quickly set out prizes for the footrace.
A silver bowl, gorgeous, just six measures deep
but the finest mixing bowl in all the world.
Nothing could match its beauty-a masterpiece
that skilled Sidonian craftsmen wrought to perfection,
Phoenician traders shipped across the misty seas
and mooring in Thoas' roads, presented to the king.
Euneus son of Jason gave it to Prince Patroclus,
the ransom paid to release Lycaon, Priam's son.
This was the bowl Achilles offered up at games
to commemorate his great friend-for the one racer
who proved the fastest on his feet. For the runner-up
he produced a massive ox with rippling folds of fat
and half a bar of gold for him who came in last.
He rose up tall and challenged all the Achaeans:
"Now men come forward, fight to win this prize!"
And the racing Oilean Ajax sprang up at once,
Odysseus quick at tactics too, then Nestor's son,
Antilochus, fastest of all the young men in the ranks.

830

840

/757-90/

BOOK 23:

FUNERAL GAMES FOR PATROCLUS

583

Achilles pointed out the post ...
They toed the lineand broke flat out from the start and Ajax shot ahead
with quick Odysseus coming right behind him, close
as the weaver's rod to a well-sashed woman's breast
when she deftly pulls it toward her, shooting the spool
across the warp, still closer, pressing her breastso close Odysseus sprinted, hot on Ajax' heels,
feet hitting his tracks before the dust could settle
and quick Odysseus panting, breathing down his neck,
always forcing the pace and all the Argives shouting,
cheering him on as he strained for triumph, sprinting on
and fast in the homestretch, spurting toward the goal
Odysseus prayed in his heart to blazing-eyed Athena,
"Hear me, Goddess, help me-hurry, urge me on!"
So Odysseus prayed and Athena heard his prayer,
put spring in his limbs, his feet, his fighting hands
and just as the whole field came lunging in for the trophy
Ajax slipped at a dead run-Athena tripped him upright where the dung lay slick from bellowing cattle
the swift runner Achilles slew in Patroclus' honor.
Dung stuffed his mouth, his nostrils dripped muck
as shining long-enduring Odysseus flashed past him
to come in first by far and carry off the cup
while Ajax took the ox. The racer in all his glory
just stood there, clutching one of the beast's horns,
spitting out the dung and sputtering to his comrades,
"Foul, by heaven! The goddess fouled my finish!
Always beside Odysseus-just like the man's mother,
rushing to put his rivals in the dust."
They all roared with laughter at his expense.
Antilochus came in last and carried off his prize
with a broad smile and a joke to warm his comrades:
"I'll tell you something you've always known, my friendsdown to this very day the gods prefer old-timers.
Look at Ajax now, with only a few years on me.
But Odysseus-why, he's out of the dark ages,

850

860

870

584

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

{790-822{

one of the old relicsbut in green old age, they say. No mean feat
to beat him out in a race, for all but our Achilles."
Bantering so, but he flattered swift Achilles
and the matchless runner paid him back in kind:
"Antilochus, how can I let your praise go unrewarded?
Here's more gold-a half-bar more in the bargain."
He placed it in his hands, and he was glad to have it.
Then Achilles carried into the armies' broad ring
a spear trailing its long shadow, laid it down
and beside it placed a battle-shield and helmet,
the arms Patroclus stripped from lord Sarpedon.
And Achilles rose and challenged all the Argives:
"We invite two men-our best-to compete for these.
Full battle-gear, take up your slashing bronze lances.
Fight it out with each other, duel before the troopsl
The soldier who gets in first and cuts a rival's flesh,
who pierces armor to draw blood and reach his entrailsI'll give that man this broadsword, silver-studded,
handsome Thracian work I stripped from Asteropaeus.
But both fighters will share this armor, bear it off,
and we'll give them a victor's banquet in our tents."
Huge Telamonian Ajax rose to meet the challenge.
Tydeus' son rose too, the powerful Diomedes.
Both men armed at opposite sides of the forces.
into the ring they strode and met, burning for battle,
glances menacing, wild excitement seizing all their comrades.
And just coming in range, just closing on each other ...
they made three rapid charges, three lunges and thenAjax stabbed through Tydides' round balanced shield
but failed to reach his flesh-saved by the breastplate
just behind the bucklerl But now Diomedes thrusting
over the giant's massive shield, again and again.
threatened to graze his throat-the spearpoint glinting sharpand such terror for Ajax struck his Argive friends

890

9QO

910

/823-55/

BOOK 23:

FUNERAL GAMES FOR PATROClUS

585

they cried for them to stop, to divide the prizes.
"Share and share alike!" But the hero Achilles
took the great long sword and gave it to Diornedes.
slung in its sheath on a supple, well-cut sword-strap.
And now Achilles set out a lump of pig iron,
the shot Eetion used to put with all his power
before the swift runner Pelides brought him down
and hauled it off in the ships with all his other wealth.
Achilles rose up tall and challenged every Achaean:
. "Now men come forward-compete to win this prize!
An ingot big enough to keep the winner in iron
for five wheeling years. Though his rich estates
lie far away in the country, it won't be want of iron
that brings his shepherd or plowman into townhe'll be well-stocked at home."
That was his offer.
Up stood Polypoetes, always braced for battle.
Leonteus flanked him, strong, intense as a god,
then Telamon's son Great Ajax, lord Epeus too.
They stood in a row. Big Epeus hefted the iron.
swung and heaved it-and comrades burst out laughing.
Next the veteran Leonteus gave the weight a hurl.
then Ajax came up third and the giant flung it hard
with his rippling brawny arm to pass all other marks.
But then Polypoetes braced for battle took the weight
and far as a seasoned herdsman flings his throwing staff.
whirling in flight across his cows to keep them all in lineso far he outhurled the whole field. The armies roared.
And the powerful Polypoetes' men sprang up to bear
the king's trophy back to their hollow ships.
Archery nextand again Achilles set out iron, dark gray trophies,
ten double-headed axes, ten with single heads.
He stepped the mast of a dark-prowed man-of-war
far down the beach and tethered a fluttering dove
atop the pole, its foot looped with a light cord.
then challenged men to shoot and hit that mark:

920

930

940

586

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

"The man who hits the fluttering dove up there
can carry the whole array of double-axes home!
Whoever misses the bird but still hits the cordhe's the loser, true, but he takes the single heads:'
Teucer the master archer rose to meet the challenge,
Meriones joined him, Idomeneus' rough-and-ready aide;
They dropped lots in a bronze helmet, shook it hard
and the lot fell to Teucer to shoot first ...
He quickly loosed an arrow, full-draw force
but never swore to the Archer
he'd slaughter splendid victims, newborn lambs,
so he missed the dove-Apollo grudged him thatbut he hit the cord that tethered the bird's foot,
the tearing arrow split the cord straight through
and the bird shot into the sky and left the tether
dangling down to ground. The armies roared applause.
But already clutching a shaft while Teucer aimed
Meriones leapt to snatch the bow from his hand
and quickly swore to the distant deadly Archer
he'd slaughter splendid victims, newborn lambsUp under the clouds he glimpsed the fluttering dove
and there as she wheeled he hit her right beneath the Wing
and straight through the heart and out the arrow passed,
plunged at Meriones' foot and stabbed the earth hard.
The dove settled onto the mast of the dark-prowed ship,
her neck wrenched awry, her beating wings went slack
and life breath flew from her limbs that instantdown she dropped, a long drop down to the ground.
The armies looked on wonder-struck and marveled.
Meriones carried off the double-axes, all ten,
Teucer took the singles back to his hollow ships.
Finally
Achilles produced a spear that trailed its long shadow,
a cauldron too, untouched by fire, chased with flowers
and worth an ox, and set them down in the ring.
And now the spear-throwers rose up to compete,
Atrides Agamemnon, lord of the far-flung kingdoms,

{855-87}

950

960

970

980

[888-97[

BOOK 23:

FUNERAL GAMES FOR PATROClUS

flanked by Idomeneus' rough-and-ready aide Meriones
but the swift runner Achilles interceded at once:
"Atrides-well we know how far you excel us all:
no one can match your strength at throwing spears,
you are the best by far!
Take first prize and return to your hollow ships
while we award this spear to the fighter Meriones,
if that would please your heart. That's what I propose."
And Agamemnon the lord of men could not resist.
Achilles gave the bronze-shod spear to Meriones.
And the winning hero Atrides gave his own prize
to his herald Talthybius-the king's burnished trophy.

587

990

BOOK

TWENTY-FOUR



The games were over now. The gathered annies scattered,
each man to his fast ship, and fighters turned their minds
to thoughts of food and the sweet warm grip of sleep.
But Achilles kept on grieving for his friend,
the memory burning on ...
and all-subduing sleep could not take him,
not now, he turned and twisted, side to side,
he longed for Patroclus' manhood, his gallant heanWhat rough campaigns they'd fought to an end together.
what hardships they had suffered, cleaving their way
through wars of men and pounding waves at sea.
The memories flooded over him, live tears flowing,
and now he'd lie on his side, now flat on his back,
now facedown again. At last he'd leap to his feet.
wander in anguish, aimless along the surf, and dawn on dawn
588

10

113-45/

BOOK 24:



flaming over the sea and shore would find him pacing.
Then he'd yoke his racing team to the chariot-harness,
lash the corpse of Hector behind the car for dragging
and haul him three times round the dead Patroclus' tomb,
and then he'd rest again in his tents and leave the body
sprawled facedown in the dust. But Apollo pitied Hectordead man though he was-and warded all corruption olf
from Hector's corpse and round him, head to foot,
the great god wrapped the golden shield of storm
so his skin would never rip as Achilles dragged him on.
And so he kept on raging, shaming noble Hector,
but the gods in bliss looked down and pitied Priam's son.
They kept on urging the sharp-eyed giant-killer Hermes
to go and steal the body, a plan that pleased them all,
but not Hera. Poseidon or the girl with blazing eyes.
They clung to their deathless hate of sacred Troy,
Priam and Priarn's people, just as they had at first
when Paris in all his madness launched the war.
He offended Athena and Hera-both goddesses.
When they came to his shepherd's fold he favored Love
who dangled before his eyes the lust that loosed disaster.
But now, at the twelfth dawn since Hector's death,
lord Apollo rose and addressed the immortal powers:
"Hard-hearted you are, you gods, you live for cruelty!
Did Hector never bum in your honor thighs of oxen
and flawless, full-grown goats? Now you cannot
bring yourselves to save him-even his corpseso his wife can see him, his mother and his child,
pis father Priam and Priam's people: how they'd rush
to bum his body on the pyre and give him royal rites!
But murderous Achilles-you gods, you choose to help Achilles.
That man without a shred of decency in his heart . . .
his temper can never bend and change-like some lion
going his own barbaric way, giving in to his power,
his brute force and wild pride, as down he swoops
on the flocks of men to seize his savage feast.
Achilles has lost all pity! No shame in the man,

589

20

30

40

50

590

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

shame that does great harm or drives, men on to good.
No doubt some mortal has suffered a dearer loss than this,
a brother born in the same womb, or even a son ...
he grieves, he weeps, but then his tears are through.
The Fates have given mortals hearts that can endure.
But this Achilles-first he slaughters Hector,
he rips away the noble prince's life
then lashes him to his chariot, drags him round
his beloved comrade's tomb. But why, I ask you?
What good will it do him? What honor will he gain?
Let that man beware, or great and glorious as he is,
we mighty gods will wheel on him in anger-look,
he outrages the senseless clay in all his fury!"
But white-armed Hera flared at him in anger:
"Yes, there'd be some merit even in what you say,
lord of the silver bow-if all you gods, in fact,
would set Achilles and Hector high in equal honor.
But Hector is mortal. He sucked a woman's breast.
Achilles sprang from a goddess-one I reared myself:
I brought her up and gave her in marriage to a man,
to Peleus, dearest to all your hearts, you gods.
All you gods, you shared in the wedding rites,
and so did you, Apollo-there you sat at the feast
and struck your lyre. What company you keep now,
these wretched Trojans. You-forever faithless!"
But Zeus who marshals the storm clouds warned his queen,
"Now, Hera, don't fly into such a rage at fellow gods.
These two can never attain the same degree of honor.
Still, the immortals loved Prince Hector dearly,
best of all the mortals born in Troy . . .
so loved him, at least:
he never stinted with gifts to please my heart.
Never once did my altar lack its share of victims,
winecups tipped and the deep smoky savor, These,
these are the gifts we claim-they are our rights.
But as for stealing courageous Hector's body,

{45-71}

60

70

80

[71-102/

BOOK 24:



we must abandon the idea-not a chance in the world
behind Achilles' back. For Thetis is always there,
his mother always hovering near him night and day.
Now, would one of you gods call Thetis to my presence?so I can declare to her my solemn, sound decree:
Achilles must receive a ransom from King Priam,
Achilles must give Hector's body back."
So he decreed
and Iris, racing a gale-wind down with Zeus's message,
mid-sea between Samos and lmbros' rugged cliffs
dove in a black swell as groaning breakers roared.
Down she plunged to the bottom fast as a lead weight
sheathed in a glinting lure of wild hull's horn,
bearing hooked death to the ravenous fish.
And deep in a hollow cave she came on Thetis.
Gathered round her sat the other immortal sea-nymphs
while Thetis amidst them mourned her brave son's fate,
doomed to die, she knew, on the fertile soil of Troy,
far from his native land. Quick as the wind now
Iris rushed to the goddess, urging, "Rise, ThetisZeus with his everlasting counsels calls you now!"
Shifting on her glistening feet, the goddess answered,
"Why .., what does the great god want with me?
I cringe from mingling with the immortals nowOh the torment-never-ending heartbreak!
But go I shall. A high decree of the Father
must not come to nothing-whatever he commands."
The radiant queen of sea-nymphs seized a veil.
blue-black, no robe darker in all the Ocean's depths,
and launched up and away with wind-swift Iris leadingthe ground swell round them cleaved and opened wide.
And striding out on shore they soared to the high sky
and found farseeing Zeus, and around him all the gods
who live in bliss forever sat in a grand assembly.
And Thetis took a seat beside the Father,
a throne Athena yielded. Hera placed in her hand
a burnished golden cup and said some words of comfort,

591

90

100

110

120

592

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

/I01-JJ/

and taking a few quick sips, Thetis gave it back ...
The father of men and gods began to address them:
"You have come to Olympus now, immortal Thetis,
for all your grief-what unforgettable sorrow
seizes on your heart. I know it well myself.
Even so, I must tell you why I called you here.
For nine whole days the immortals have been feuding
over Hector's corpse and Achilles scourge of cities.
They keep urging the sharp-eyed giant-killer Hermes
to go and steal the body. But that is not my way.
I will grant Achilles glory and so safeguard
your awe and love of me for all the years to come.
Go at once to the camp, give your son this order:
tell him the gods are angry with him now
and I am rising over them all in deathless wrath
that he in heartsick fury still holds Hector's body,
there by his beaked ships, and will not give him backperhaps in fear of me he'll give him back at once.
Then, at the same time, I am Winging Iris down
to greathearted Priam, commanding the king
to ransom his dear son, to go to Achaea's ships,
bearing gifts to Achilles, gifts to melt his rage."
So he decreed
and Thetis with her glistening feet did not resist a moment.
Down the goddess flashed from the peaks of Mount Olympus,
made her way to her son's camp, and there he was,
she found him groaning hard, choked with sobs.
Around him trusted comrades swung to the work,
preparing breakfast, steadying in their midst
a large fleecy sheep just slaughtered in the shelter.
But his noble mother, settling down at his side,
stroked Achilles gently, whispering his name: "My childhow long will you eat your heart out here in tears and torment?
All wiped from your mind, all thought of food and bed?
It's a welcome thing to make love with a woman ...
You don't have long to live now, well I know:
already I see them looming up beside you-death
and the strong force of fate. Listen to me.

no

140

150

160

{l JJ-6Jj

BOOK 24:



593

quickly! I bring you a message sent by Zeus:
he says the gods are angry with you now
and he is rising over them all in deathless wrath
that you in heartsick fury still hold Hector's body,
here by your beaked ships, and will not give him back.
o give him back at once-take ransom for the dead!"
The swift runner replied in haste, "So be it.
The man who brings the ransom can take away the body,
if Olympian Zeus himself insists in all earnest:'


170

180

190

594

HOMER:

THE lLlAD

And the old man, rushing to climb aboard his chariot,
drove out through the gates and echoing colonnades.
The mules in the lead hauled out the four-wheeled wagon,
driven on by seasoned Idaeus. The horses came behind
as the old man cracked the lash and urged them fast
throughout the city with all his kinsmen trailing ...
weeping their hearts out, as if he went to his death.
But once the two passed down through crowded streets
and out into open country, Priam's kin turned back,
his sons and in-laws straggling home to Troy.
But Zeus who beholds the world could hardly fail
to see the two men striking out across the plain.
As he watched the old man he filled with pity
and quickly summoned Hermes, his own dear son:
"Hermes-escorting men is your greatest joy,
you above all the gods,
and you listen to the wish of those you favor.
So down you go. Down and conduct King Priam there
through Achaea's beaked ships, so none will see him,
none of the Argive fighters recognize him now,
not till he reaches Peleus' royal son."
So he decreed
and Bermes the giant-killing guide obeyed at once.
Under his feet he fastened the supple sandals,
never-dying gold, that wing him over the waves
and boundless earth with the rush of gusting winds.
He seized the wand that enchants the eyes of men
whenever Hermes wants, or wakes them up from sleep.
That wand in his grip he flew, the mighty giant-killer
touching down on Troy and the Hellespont in no time
and from there he went on foot, for all the world

599

380

390

400

410

600

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

{J47-771

like a young prince, sporting his first beard.
just in the prime and fresh warm pride of youth.
And now,
as soon as the two drove past the great tomb of lIus
they drew rein at the ford to water mules and team.
A sudden darkness had swept across the earth
and Hermes was all but on them when the herald
looked up, saw him, shouted at once to Priam,
"Danger, my king-s-think fast! I see a manI'm afraid we'll both be butchered on the spotinto the chariot, hurry! Run for our lives
or fling ourselves at his knees and beg for mercy!"
The old man was stunned, in a swirl of terror,
the hairs stood bristling all over his gnarled bodyhe stood there, staring dumbly. Not waiting for welcome
the running god of luck went straight up to Priam,
clasped the old king's hands and asked him warmly,
"Father-where do you drive these mules and team
through the godsent night while other mortals sleep?
Have you no fear of the Argives breathing hate and fury?
Here are your deadly enemies, camping dose at hand.
Now what if one of them saw you, rolling blithely on
through the rushing night with so much tempting treasure-show would you feel then? You're not so young yourself,
and the man who attends you here is far too old
to drive off an attacker spoiling for a fight.
But I would never hurt you-and what's more,
I'd beat off any man who'd do you harm:
you remind me of my dear father, to the life."
And the old and noble Priam said at once,
"Our straits are hard, dear child, as you say.
But a god still holds his hands above me, even me.
Sending such a traveler here to meet mewhat a lucky omen! Look at your build ...
your handsome face-a wonder. And such good senseyour parents must be blissful as the gods!"

420

430

440

{378-408!

BOOK 24:



The guide and giant-killer answered quickly,
"You're right, old man, all straight to the mark.
But come, tell me the truth now, point by point:
this treasure-a king's ransom-do you send it off
to distant, outland men, to keep it safe for you?
Or now do you all abandon sacred Troy,
all in panic-such was the man who died,
your finest, bravest man .., your own son
who never failed in a fight against the Argives."

601

450

But the old majestic Priam countered quickly.
"Who are you, my fine friend?-who are your parents?
How can you speak so well of my doomed son's fate?"
And the guide and giant-killer answered staunchly,
"You're testing me, old man-asking of noble Hector.
Ah, how often I watched him battling on the lines
where men win glory, saw the man with my own eyes!
And saw him drive Achaeans against the ships that day
he kept on killing, cutting them down with slashing bronze
while we stood by and marveled-AchiIles reined us in:
no fighting for us while he raged on at Agamemnon.
I am Achilles' aide, you see,
one and the same good warship brought us here.
I am a Myrmidon, and my father is Polyctor.
and a wealthy man he is, about as old as you. . .
He has six sons-s-I'm the seventh-we all shook lots
and it fell to me to join the armies here at Troy.
I've just come up from the ships to scout the plainat dawn the fiery-eyed Achaeans fight around the city.
They chafe, sitting in camp, so bent on battle now
the kings of Achaea cannot hold them back."
And the old and noble Priam asked at once,
"If you really are the royal Achilles' aide.
please, tell me the whole truth, point by point.
My son-does he still lie by the beached ships,

460

470

480

602

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

{408-18J

or by now has the great Achilles hacked him
limb from limb and served him to his dogs?"
The guide and giant-killer reassured him:
"So far, old man, no birds or dogs have eaten him.
No, there he lies-still there at Achilles' ship,
still intact in his shelters.
This is the twelfth day he's lain there, too,
but his body has not decayed, not in the least,
nor have the worms begun to gnaw his corpse,
the swarms that devour men who faU in battle.
True, dawn on fiery dawn he drags him round
his beloved comrade's tomb, drags him ruthlessly
but he cannot mutilate his body. It's marvelous-go see for yourself how he lies there fresh as dew,
the blood washed away, and no sign of corruption.
All his wounds sealed shut, wherever they struck ...
and many drove their bronze blades through his body.
Such pains the blissful gods are lavishing on your son,
dead man though he is--the gods love him dearly!"
And the old man rejoiced at that, bursting out,
"0 my child, how good it is to give the immortals
fit and proper gifts! Now take my sonor was he all a dream? Never once in his halls
did he forget the gods who hold Olympus, never,
so now they remember him . . , ifonly after death.
Come, this handsome cup: accept it from me, I beg youl
Protect me, escort me now-if the gods will it soall the way till I reach Achilles' shelter."
The guide and giant-killer refused him firmly,
"You test me again, old man, since I am young,
but you will not persuade me,
tempting me with a gift behind Achilles' back.
I fear the man, I'd die of shame to rob himjust think of the trouble I might suffer later.
But I'd escort you with all the kindness in my heart.

490

500

510

/437-711

BOOK 24:



all the way till I reached the shining hills of Argos
bound in a scudding ship or pacing you on footand no marauder on earth, scorning your escort,
would dare attack you then."
And the god of luck,
leaping onto the chariot right behind the team,
quickly grasped the whip and reins in his hands
and breathed fresh spirit into the mules and horses.
As they reached the trench and rampart round the fleet,
the sentries had just begun to set out supper there
but the giant-killer plunged them all in sleep ...
he spread the gates at once, slid back the bars
and ushered Priam in with his wagon-load of treasure.
Now, at last, they approached royal Achilles' shelter,
the tall, imposing lodge the Myrmidons built their king,
hewing planks of pine, and roofed it high with thatch,
gathering thick shaggy reeds from the meadow banks,
and round it built their king a spacious courtyard
fenced with close-set stakes. A single pine beam
held the gates, and it took three men to ram it home,
three to shoot the immense bolt back and spread the doorsthree average men. Achilles alone could ram it home himself.
But the god of luck now spread the gates for the old man,
drove in the glinting gifts for Peleus' swift son,
climbed down from behind the team and said to Priam,
"Old man, look, I am a god come down to you,
I am immortal Hermesmy Father sent me here to be your escort.
But now I will hasten back. I will not venture
into Achilles' presence: it would offend us all
for a mortal man to host an immortal face-to-face.
But you go in yourself and clasp Achilles' knees,
implore him by his father, his mother with lovely hair,
by his own son-so you can stir his heart!"
With that urging
Hermes went his way to the steep heights of Olympus.
But Priam swung down to earth from the battle-car
and leaving Idaeus there to rein in mules and team,

603

520

530

540

550

604

HOMER-

THE ILIAD

[he old king went straight up to the lodge
where Achilles dear to Zeus would always sit.
Priam found the warrior there inside ...
many captains sitting some way off, but two,
veteran Automedon and the fine fighter Alcimus
were busy serving him. He had just finished dinner,
eating, drinking, and the table still stood near.
The majestic king of Troy slipped past the rest
and kneeling down beside Achilles, clasped his knees
and kissed his hands, those terrible, man-killing hands
that had slaughtered Priam's many sons in battle.
Awesome-as when the grip of madness seizes one
who murders a man in his own fatherland and flees
abroad to foreign shores, to a wealthy, noble host,
and a sense of marvel runs through all who see himso Achilles marveled, beholding majestic Priam.
His men marveled too, trading startled glances.
But Priam prayed his heart out to Achilles:
"Remember your own father, great godlike Achillesas old as I am, past the threshold of deadly old age!
No doubt the countrymen round about him plague him now,
with no one there to defend him, beat away disaster.
No one-s-but at least he hears you're still alive
and his old heart rejoices, hopes rising, day by day,
to see his beloved son come sailing home from Troy.
But l-dear god, my life so cursed by fate ...
I fathered hero sons in the wide realm of Troy
and now not a single one is left, I tell you.
Fifty sons I had when the sons of Achaea came,
nineteen born to me from a single mother's womb
and the rest by other women in the palace. Many,
most of them violent Ares cut the knees from under.
But one, one was left me, to guard my walls, my peoplethe one you killed the other day, defending his fatherland,
my Hector! It's all for him I've come to the ships now,
to win him back from you-I bring a priceless ransom.
Revere the gods, Achilles! Pity me in my own right,
remember your own father! I deserve more pity ...

(471- 504/

560

570

580



605

I have endured what no one on earth has ever done beforeI put to my lips the hands of the man who killed my son."

590

{505-37{

BOOK 24:

Those words stirred within Achilles a deep desire
to grieve for his own father. Taking the old man's hand
he gently moved him back. And overpowered by memory
both men gave way to grief. Priam wept freely
for man-killing Hector, throbbing, crouching
before Achilles' feet as Achilles wept himself,
now for his father, now for Patroclus once again,
and their sobbing rose and fell throughout the house.
Then, when brilliant Achilles had had his fill of tears
and the longing for it had left his mind and body,
he rose from his seat, raised the old man by the hand
and filled with pity now for his gray head and gray beard,
he spoke out winging words, flying straight to the heart:
"Poor man, how much you've borne-pain to break the spirit!
What daring brought you down ro the ships, all alone,
to face the glance of the man who killed your sons,
so many fine brave boys? You have a heart of iron.
Come, please, sit down on this chair here ...
Let us put our griefs to rest in our own hearts,
rake them up no more, raw as we are with mourning.
What good's to be won from tears that chilI the spirit?
So the immortals spun our lives that we, we wretched men
live on to bear such torments--the gods live free of sorrows.
There are two great jars that stand on the floor of Zeus's halls
and hold his gifts, our miseries one, the other blessings.
When Zeus who loves the lightning mixes gifts for a man,
now he meets with misfortune, now good times in turn.
When Zeus dispenses gifts from the jar of sorrows only,
he makes a man an outcast-brutal, ravenous hunger
drives him down the face of the shining earth,
stalking far and wide, cursed by gods and men.
So with my father, Peleus. What glittering gifts
the gods rained down from the day that he was born!
He excelled all men in wealth and pride of place,
he lorded the Myrmidons, and mortal that he was,

600

610

620

606

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

they gave the man an immonal goddess for a wife.
Yes, but even on him the Father piled hardships,
no powerful race of princes born in his royal halls,
only a single son he fathered, doomed at birth,
cut off in the spring of lifeand I. I give the man no care as he grows old
since here I sit in Troy, far from my fatherland,
a grief to you, a grief to all your children ...
And you too, old man, we hear you prospered once:
as far as Lesbos, Macar's kingdom, bounds to seaward,
Phrygia east and upland, the Hellespont vast and norththat entire realm, they say, you lorded over once,
you excelled all men, old king, in sons and wealth.
But then the gods of heaven brought this agony on youceaseless battles round your walls, your armies slaughtered.
You must bear up now. Enough of endless tears,
the pain that breaks the spirit.
Grief for your son will do no good at all.
You will never bring him back to lifesooner, you must suffer something worse."
But the old and noble Priam protested strongly:
"Don't 'make me sit on a chair, Achilles, Prince,
not while Hector lies uncared-for in your camp!
Give him back to me, now, no more delayI must see my son with my own eyes.
Accept the ransom I bring you, a king's ransom!
Enjoy it, all of it-return to your own native land,
safe and sound .., since now you've spared my life:'
A dark glance-and the headstrong runner answered,
"No more, old man, don't tempt my wrath, not now!
My own mind's made up to give you back your son.
A messenger brought me word from Zeus-my mother,
Thetis who bore me, the Old Man of the Sea's daughter.
And what's more, I can see through you, Priamno hiding the fact from me: one of the gods

{537-64]

630

640

650

660

[564-95/

BOOK 24:

607

has led you down to Achaea's fast ships.
No man alive, not even a rugged young fighter,
would dare to venture into our camp. Neverhow could he slip past the sentries unchallenged?
Or shoot back the bolt of my gates with so much ease?
So don't anger me now. Don't stir my raging heart still more.
Or under my own roof I may not spare your life, old mansuppliant that you are-may break the laws of Zeus!"
The old man was terrified. He obeyed the order.
But Achilles bounded out of doors like a lionnot alone but flanked by his two aides-in-arms,
veteran Automedon and Alcirnus, steady comrades,
Achilles' favorites next to the dead Patroclus.
They loosed from harness the horses and the mules,
they led the herald in, the old king's crier,
and sat him down on a bench. From the polished wagon
they lifted the priceless ransom brought for Hector's corpse
but they left behind two capes and a finely-woven shirt
to shroud the body well when Priam bore him home.
Then Achilles called the serving-women out:
"Bathe and anoint the bodybear it aside first. Priam must not see his son."
He feared that, overwhelmed by the sight of Hector,
wild with grief, Priam might let his anger flare
and Achilles might fly into fresh rage himself,
cut the old man down and break the laws of Zeus.
So when the maids had bathed and anointed the body
sleek with olive oil and wrapped it round and round
in a braided battle-shirt and handsome battle-cape,
then Achilles lifted Hector up in his own arms
and laid him down on a bier, and comrades helped him
raise the bier and body onto the sturdy wagon . . .
Then with a groan he called his dear friend by name:
"Feel no anger at me, Patroclus, if you learneven there in the House of Death-I let his father
have Prince Hector back. He gave me worthy ransom
and you shall have your share from me, as always,

670

680

690

608

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

/595-622/

your fitting, lordly share,"
So he vowed
and brilliant Achilles strode back to his shelter,
sat down on the well-carved chair that he had left,
at the far wall of the room, leaned toward Priam
and firmly spoke the words the king had come to hear:
"Your son is now set free, old man, as you requested.
Hector lies in state. With the first light of day
you will see for yourself as you convey him home.
Now, at last, let us turn our thoughts to supper.
Even Niobe with her lustrous hair remembered food,
though she saw a dozen children killed in her own halls,
six daughters and six sons in the pride and prime of youth.
True, lord Apollo killed the sons with his silver bow
and Artemis showering arrows killed the daughters.
Both gods were enraged at Niobe, Time and again
she placed herself on a par with their own mother,
Leto in her immortal beauty-how she insulted Leto:
'All you have borne is two, but I have borne so many!'
So, two as they were, they slaughtered all her children.
Nine days they lay in their blood, no one to bury themCronus' son had turned the people into stone ...
then on the tenth the gods of heaven interred them.
And Niobe, gaunt, worn to the bone with weeping,
turned her thoughts to food. And now, somewhere,
lost on the crags, on the lonely mountain slopes,
on Sipylus where, they say, the nymphs who live forever,
dancing along the Achelous River 'run to beds of restthere, struck into stone, Niobe still broods
on the spate of griefs the gods poured out to her.
So come-we too, old king, must think of food.
Later you can mourn your beloved son once more,
when you bear him home to Troy, and you'll weep many tears."
Never pausing, the swift runner sprang to his feet
and slaughtered a white sheep as comrades moved in
to skin the carcass quickly, dress the quarters well.

700

710

720

730

[623-55]

BOOK 24:



Expertly they cut the meat in pieces, pierced them with spits,
roasted them to a turn and pulled them off the fire.
Automedon brought the bread, set it out on the board
in ample wicker baskets. Achilles served the meat.
They reached out for the good things that lay at hand
and when they had put aside desire for food and drink,
Priam the son of Dardanus gazed at Achilles, marveling
now at the man's beauty, his magnificent buildface-to-face he seemed a deathless god ...
and Achilles gazed and marveled at Dardan Priam.
beholding his noble looks, listening to his words.
But once they'd had their fill of gazing at each other,
the old majestic Priam broke the silence first:
"Put me to bed quickly. Achilles, Prince.
Time to rest, to enjoy the sweet relief of sleep.
Not once have my eyes closed shut beneath my lids
from the day my son went down beneath your hands. . .
day and night I groan, brooding over the countless griefs.
groveling in the dung that fills my walled-in court.
But now, at long last. I have tasted food again
and let some glistening wine go down my throat.
Before this hour I had tasted nothing."
He shook his head
as Achilles briskly told his men and serving-women
to make beds in the porch's shelter, to lay down
some heavy purple throws for the beds themselves
and over them spread some blankets, thick woolly robes.
a warm covering laid on top. Torches in hand.
they left the hall and fell to work at once
and in no time two good beds were spread and made.
Then Achilles nodded to Priam, leading the king on
with brusque advice: "Sleep outside, old friend,
in case some Achaean captain comes to visit.
They keep on coming now, huddling beside me.
making plans for battle-it's their duty.
But if one saw you here in the rushing dark night
he'd tell Agamemnon straightaway, our good commander.
Then you'd have real delay in ransoming the body.

609

740

750

760

770

610

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

/656-85}

One more point. Tell me, be precise about ithow many days do you need to bury Prince Hector?
I will hold back myself
and keep the Argive armies back that long."
And the old and noble Priam answered slowly,
"If you truly want me to give Prince Hector burial.
full, royal honors, you'd show me a great kindness,
Achilles, if you would do exactly as I say.
You know how crammed we are inside our city,
how far it is to the hills to haul in timber,
and our Trojans are afraid to make the journey.
Well, nine days we should mourn him in our halls,
on the tenth we'd bury Hector, hold the public feast,
on the eleventh build the barrow high above his bodyon the twelfth we'd fight again .., if fight we must."

780

The swift runner Achilles reassured him quickly:
"All will be done, old Priam, as you command.
I will hold our attack as long as you require."
With that he clasped the old king by the wrist,
by the right hand, to free his heart from fear.
Then Priam and herald, minds set on the journey home,
bedded down for the night within the porch's shelter.
And deep in his sturdy well-built lodge Achilles slept
with Briseis in all her beauty sleeping by his side.
Now the great array of gods and chariot-driving men
slept all night long, overcome by gentle sleep.
But sleep could never hold the running EscortHermes kept on turning it over in his mind ...
how could he convoy Priam clear of the ships,
unseen by devoted guards who held the gates?
Hovering at his head the Escort rose and spoke:
"Not a care in the world, old man? Look at you,
how you sleep in the midst of men who'd kill youand just because Achilles spared your life. Now, yes,

790

800

{685-7lJ}

BOOK 24:



611

you've ransomed your dear son-for a king's ransom.
But wouldn't the sons you left behind be forced
to pay three times as much for you alive?
What if Atrides Agamemnon learns you're herewhat if the whole Achaean army learns you're here?"
The old king woke in terror, roused the herald.
Hermes harnessed the mules and team for both men,
drove them fast through the camp and no one saw them.
Once they reached the ford where the river runs clear,
the strong, whirling Xanthus sprung of immortal Zeus,
Hermes went his way to the steep heights of Olympus
as Dawn flung out her golden robe across the earth,
and the two men, weeping, groaning, drove the team
toward Troy and the mules brought on the body.
No one saw them at first, neither man nor woman,
none before Cassandra, golden as goddess Aphrodite.
She had climbed to Pergamus heights and from that point
she saw her beloved father swaying tall in the chariot,
flanked by the herald, whose cry could rouse the city.
And Cassandra saw him too ...
drawn by the mules and stretched out on his bier.
She screamed and her scream rang out through all Troy:
"Come, look down, you men of Troy, you Trojan women!
Behold Hector now-if you ever once rejoiced
to see him striding home, home alive from battle!
He was the greatest joy of Troy and all our people!"
Her cries plunged Troy into uncontrollable grief
and not a man or woman was left inside the walls.
They streamed out at the gates to meet Priam
bringing in the body of the dead. Heetorhis lovmg wife and noble mother were first
to fling themselves on the wagon rolling on,
the first to tear their hair, embrace his head
and a wailing throng of people milled around them.
And now, all day long till the setting sun went down

810

820

830

612

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

{714-4J]

they would have wept for Hector there before the gates
if the old man, steering the car, had not commanded,
"Let me through with the mules! Soon, in a moment,
you can have your fill of tears-once I've brought him home."
So he called and the crowds fell back on either side,
making way for the wagon. Once they had borne him
into the famous halls, they laid his body down
on his large carved bed and set beside him singers
to lead off the laments, and their voices rose in griefthey lifted the dirge high as the women wailed in answer.
And white-armed Andromache led their songs of sorrow,
cradling the head of Hector, man-killing Hector
gently in her arms: "0 my husband ...
cut off from life so young! You leave me a widow,
lost in the royal halls-and the boy only a baby,
the son we bore together, you and I so doomed.
I cannot think he will ever come to manhood.
Long before that the city will be sacked,
plundered top to bottom! Because you are dead,
her great guardian, you who always defended Troy,
who kept her loyal wives and helpless children safe,
all who will soon be carried off in the hollow ships
and I with themAnd you, my child, will follow me
to labor, somewhere, at harsh, degrading work,
slaving under some heartless master's eye-that,
or some Achaean marauder will seize you by the arm
and hurl you headlong down from the ramparts-horrible deathenraged at you because Hector once cut down his brother,
his father or his son, yes, hundreds of armed Achaeans
gnawed the dust of the world, crushed by Hector's hands!
Your father, remember, was no man of mercy. . .
not in the horror of battle, and that is why
the whole city of Troy mourns you now, my Hectoryou've brought your parents accursed tears and grief
but to me most of all you've left the horror, the heartbreak!
For you never died in bed and stretched your arms to me

840

850

860

870

(744-74/

BOOK 24:



613

or said some last word from the heart I can remember,
always, weeping for you through all my nights and days!"
Her voice rang out in tears and the women wailed in answer
and Hecuba led them now in a throbbing chant of sorrow:
"Hector, dearest to me by far of all my sons. . .
and dear to the gods while we still shared this Iif~
and they cared about you still, I see, even after death.
Many the sons I had whom the swift runner Achilles
caught and shipped on the barren salt sea as slaves
to Sarnos, to Imbros, to Lemnos shrouded deep in mist!
But you, once he slashed away your life with his brazen spear
he dragged you time and again around his comrade's tomb,
Patroclus whom you killed-not that he brought Patroclus
back to life by that. But I have you with me now ...
fresh as the morning dew you lie in the royal halls
like one whom Apollo, lord of the silver bow,
has approached and shot to death with gentle shafts."
Her voice rang out in tears and an endless wail rose up
and Helen, the third in turn, led their songs of sorrow:
"Hector! Dearest to me of all my husband's brothersmy husband, Paris, magnificent as a god ...
he was the one who brought me here to TroyOh how I wish I'd died before that day!
But this, now, is the twentieth year for me
since I sailed here and forsook my own native land,
yet never once did I hear from you a taunt, an insult.
But if someone else in the royal halls would curse me,
one of your brothers or sisters or brothers' wives
trailing their long robes, even your own mothernot your father, always kind as my own fatherwhy, you'd restrain them with words, Hector,
you'd win them to my side ...
you with your gentle temper, all your gentle words.
And so in the same breath I mourn for you and me,
my doom-struck, harrowed hean! Now there is no one left

880

890

900

910

614

HOMER:

THE ILIAD

[774-804/

in the wide realm of Troy, no friend to treat me kindlyall the countrymen cringe from me in loathing!"
Her voice rang out in tears and vast throngs wailed
and old King Priam rose and gave his people orders:
"Now, you men of Troy, haul timber into the city!
Have no fear of an Argive ambush packed with dangerAchilles vowed, when he sent me home from the black ships,
not to do us harm till the twelfth dawn arrives."
At his command they harnessed oxen and mules to wagons,
they assembled before the city walls with all good speed
and for nine days hauled in a boundless store of timber.
But when the tenth Dawn brought light to the mortal world
they carried gallant Hector forth, weeping tears,
and they placed his corpse aloft the pyre's crest,
flung a torch and set it all aflame.
At last,
when young Dawn with her rose-red fingers shone once more,
the people massed around illustrious Hector's pyre ...
And once they'd gathered, crowding the meeting grounds,
they first put out the fires with glistening wine,
wherever the flames still burned in all their fury.
Then they collected the white bones of Hectorall his brothers, his friends-in-arms, mourning,
and warm tears came streaming down their cheeks.
They placed the bones they found in a golden chest.
shrouding them round and round in soft purple cloths.
They quickly lowered the chest in a deep, hollow grave
and over it piled a cope of huge stones closely set,
then hastily heaped a barrow, posted lookouts all around
for fear the Achaean combat troops would launch their attack
before the time agreed. And once they'd heaped the mound
they turned back home to Troy, and gathering once again
they shared a splendid funeral feast in Hector's honor,
held in the house of Priarn, king by will of Zeus.
And so the Trojans buried Hector breaker of horses.