
IN A CITY SWOLLEN BY REFUGEES but still mostly at peace, or at least not yet
openly at war, a young man met a young woman in a classroom and did not
speak to her. For many days. His name was Saeed and her name was Nadia and
he had a beard, not a full beard, more a studiously maintained stubble, and she
was always clad from the tips of her toes to the bottom of her jugular notch in a
flowing black robe. Back then people continued to enjoy the luxury of wearing
more or less what they wanted to wear, clothing and hair wise, within certain
bounds of course, and so these choices meant something.
It might seem odd that in cities teetering at the edge of the abyss young
people still go to class—in this case an evening class on corporate identity and
product branding—but that is the way of things, with cities as with life, for one
moment we are pottering about our errands as usual and the next we are dying,
and our eternally impending ending does not put a stop to our transient
beginnings and middles until the instant when it does.
Saeed noticed that Nadia had a beauty mark on her neck, a tawny oval that
sometimes, rarely but not never, moved with her pulse.
• • •
NOT LONG AFTER NOTICING THIS, Saeed spoke to Nadia for the first time. Their
city had yet to experience any major fighting, just some shootings and the odd
car bombing, felt in one’s chest cavity as a subsonic vibration like those emitted
by large loudspeakers at music concerts, and Saeed and Nadia had packed up
their books and were leaving class.
In the stairwell he turned to her and said, “Listen, would you like to have a
coffee,” and after a brief pause added, to make it seem less forward, given her
conservative attire, “in the cafeteria?”
Nadia looked him in the eye. “You don’t say your evening prayers?” she
asked.
Saeed conjured up his most endearing grin. “Not always. Sadly.”
Her expression did not change.
So he persevered, clinging to his grin with the mounting desperation of a
doomed rock climber: “I think it’s personal. Each of us has his own way. Or . . .
her own way. Nobody’s perfect. And, in any case—”
She interrupted him. “I don’t pray,” she said.
She continued to gaze at him steadily.
Then she said, “Maybe another time.”
He watched as she walked out to the student parking area and there, instead
of covering her head with a black cloth, as he expected, she donned a black
motorcycle helmet that had been locked to a scuffed-up hundred-ish cc trail bike,
snapped down her visor, straddled her ride, and rode off, disappearing with a
controlled rumble into the gathering dusk.
• • •
THE NEXT DAY, at work, Saeed found himself unable to stop thinking of Nadia.
Saeed’s employer was an agency that specialized in the placement of outdoor
advertising. They owned billboards all around the city, rented others, and struck
deals for further space with the likes of bus lines, sports stadiums, and
proprietors of tall buildings.
The agency occupied both floors of a converted townhouse and had over a
dozen employees. Saeed was among the most junior, but his boss liked him and
had tasked him with turning around a pitch to a local soap company that had to
go out by email before five. Normally Saeed tried to do copious amounts of
online research and customize his presentations as much as possible. “It’s not a
story if it doesn’t have an audience,” his boss was fond of saying, and for Saeed
this meant trying to show a client that his firm truly understood their business,
could really get under their skin and see things from their point of view.
But today, even though the pitch was important—every pitch was important:
the economy was sluggish from mounting unrest and one of the first costs clients
seemed to want to cut was outdoor advertising—Saeed couldn’t focus. A large
tree, overgrown and untrimmed, reared up from the tiny back lawn of his firm’s
townhouse, blocking out the sunlight in such a manner that the back lawn had
been reduced mostly to dirt and a few wisps of grass, interspersed with a
morning’s worth of cigarette butts, for his boss had banned people from smoking
indoors, and atop this tree Saeed had spotted a hawk constructing its nest. It
worked tirelessly. Sometimes it floated at eye level, almost stationary in the
wind, and then, with the tiniest movement of a wing, or even of the upturned
feathers at one wingtip, it veered.
Saeed thought of Nadia and watched the hawk.
When he was at last running out of time he scrambled to prepare the pitch,
copying and pasting from others he had done before. Only a smattering of the
images he selected had anything particularly to do with soap. He took a draft to
his boss and suppressed a wince while sliding it over.
But his boss seemed preoccupied and didn’t notice. He just jotted some minor
edits on the printout, handed it back to Saeed with a wistful smile, and said,
“Send it out.”
Something about his expression made Saeed feel sorry for him. He wished he
had done a better job.
• • •
AS SAEED’S EMAIL was being downloaded from a server and read by his client,
far away in Australia a pale-skinned woman was sleeping alone in the Sydney
neighborhood of Surry Hills. Her husband was in Perth on business. The woman
wore only a long T-shirt, one of his, and a wedding ring. Her torso and left leg
were covered by a sheet even paler than she was; her right leg and right hip were
bare. On her right ankle, perched in the dip of her Achilles tendon, was the blue
tattoo of a small mythological bird.
Her home was alarmed, but the alarm was not active. It had been installed by
previous occupants, by others who had once called this place home, before the
phenomenon referred to as the gentrification of this neighborhood had run as far
as it had now run. The sleeping woman used the alarm only sporadically, mostly
when her husband was absent, but on this night she had forgotten. Her bedroom
window, four meters above the ground, was open, just a slit.
In the drawer of her bedside table were a half-full packet of birth control
pills, last consumed three months ago, when she and her husband were still
trying not to conceive, passports, checkbooks, receipts, coins, keys, a pair of
handcuffs, and a few paper-wrapped sticks of unchewed chewing gum.
The door to her closet was open. Her room was bathed in the glow of her
computer charger and wireless router, but the closet doorway was dark, darker
than night, a rectangle of complete darkness—the heart of darkness. And out of
this darkness, a man was emerging.
He too was dark, with dark skin and dark, woolly hair. He wriggled with
great effort, his hands gripping either side of the doorway as though pulling
himself up against gravity, or against the rush of a monstrous tide. His neck
followed his head, tendons straining, and then his chest, his half-unbuttoned,
sweaty, gray-and-brown shirt. Suddenly he paused in his exertions. He looked
around the room. He looked at the sleeping woman, the shut bedroom door, the
open window. He rallied himself again, fighting mightily to come in, but in
desperate silence, the silence of a man struggling in an alley, on the ground, late
at night, to free himself of hands clenched around his throat. But there were no
hands around this man’s throat. He wished only not to be heard.
With a final push he was through, trembling and sliding to the floor like a
newborn foal. He lay still, spent. Tried not to pant. He rose.
His eyes rolled terribly. Yes: terribly. Or perhaps not so terribly. Perhaps they
merely glanced about him, at the woman, at the bed, at the room. Growing up in
the not infrequently perilous circumstances in which he had grown up, he was
aware of the fragility of his body. He knew how little it took to make a man into
meat: the wrong blow, the wrong gunshot, the wrong flick of a blade, turn of a
car, presence of a microorganism in a handshake, a cough. He was aware that
alone a person is almost nothing.
The woman who slept, slept alone. He who stood above her, stood alone. The
bedroom door was shut. The window was open. He chose the window. He was
through it in an instant, dropping silkily to the street below.
• • •
WHILE THIS INCIDENT was occurring in Australia, Saeed was picking up fresh
bread for dinner and heading home. He was an independent-minded, grown man,
unmarried, with a decent post and a good education, and as was the case in those
days in his city with most independent-minded, grown men, unmarried, with
decent posts and good educations, he lived with his parents.
Saeed’s mother had the commanding air of a schoolteacher, which she
formerly was, and his father the slightly lost bearing of a university professor,
which he continued to be—though on reduced wages, for he was past the official
retirement age and had been forced to seek out visiting faculty work. Both of
Saeed’s parents, the better part of a lifetime ago, had chosen respectable
professions in a country that would wind up doing rather badly by its respectable
professionals. Security and status were to be found only in other, quite different
pursuits. Saeed had been born to them late, so late that his mother had believed
her doctor was being cheeky when he asked if she thought she was pregnant.
Their small flat was in a once handsome building, with an ornate though now
crumbling facade that dated back to the colonial era, in a once upscale, presently
crowded and commercial, part of town. It had been partitioned from a much
larger flat and comprised three rooms: two modest bedrooms and a third
chamber they used for sitting, dining, entertaining, and watching television. This
third chamber was also modest in size but had tall windows and a usable, if
narrow, balcony, with a view down an alley and straight up a boulevard to a dry
fountain that once gushed and sparkled in the sunlight. It was the sort of view
that might command a slight premium during gentler, more prosperous times,
but would be most undesirable in times of conflict, when it would be squarely in
the path of heavy machine-gun and rocket fire as fighters advanced into this part
of town: a view like staring down the barrel of a rifle. Location, location,
location, the realtors say. Geography is destiny, respond the historians.
War would soon erode the facade of their building as though it had
accelerated time itself, a day’s toll outpacing that of a decade.
• • •
WHEN SAEED’S PARENTS FIRST MET they were the same age as were Saeed and
Nadia when they first did. The elder pair’s was a love marriage, a marriage
between strangers not arranged by their families, which, in their circles, while
not unprecedented, was still less than common.
They met at the cinema, during the intermission of a film about a resourceful
princess. Saeed’s mother spied his father having a cigarette and was struck by
his similarity to the male lead in the movie. This similarity was not entirely
accidental: though a little shy and very bookish, Saeed’s father styled himself
after the popular film stars and musicians of his day, as did most of his friends.
But Saeed’s father’s myopia combined with his personality to give him an
expression that was genuinely dreamy, and this, understandably, resulted in
Saeed’s mother thinking he not merely looked the part, but embodied it. She
decided to make her approach.
Standing in front of Saeed’s father she proceeded to talk animatedly with a
friend while ignoring the object of her desire. He noticed her. He listened to her.
He summoned the nerve to speak to her. And that, as they were both fond of
saying when recounting the story of their meeting in subsequent years, was that.
Saeed’s mother and father were both readers, and, in different ways, debaters,
and they were frequently to be seen in the early days of their romance meeting
surreptitiously in bookshops. Later, after their marriage, they would while away
afternoons reading together in cafés and restaurants, or, when the weather was
suitable, on their balcony. He smoked and she said she didn’t, but often, when
the ash of his seemingly forgotten cigarette grew impossibly extended, she took
it from his fingers, trimmed it softly against an ashtray, and pulled a long and
rather rakish drag before returning it, daintily.
The cinema where Saeed’s parents met was long gone by the time their son
met Nadia, as were the bookshops they favored and most of their beloved
restaurants and cafés. It was not that cinemas and bookshops, restaurants and
cafés had vanished from the city, just that many of those that had been there
before were there no longer. The cinema they remembered so fondly had been
replaced by a shopping arcade for computers and electronic peripherals. This
building had taken the same name as the cinema that preceded it: both once had
the same owner, and the cinema had been so famous as to have become a
byword for that locality. When walking by the arcade, and seeing that old name
on its new neon sign, sometimes Saeed’s father, sometimes Saeed’s mother,
would remember, and smile. Or remember, and pause.
• • •
SAEED’S PARENTS did not have sex until their wedding night. Of the two, Saeed’s
mother found it more uncomfortable, but she was also the more keen, and so she
insisted on repeating the act twice more before dawn. For many years, their
balance remained thus. Generally speaking, she was voracious in bed. Generally
speaking, he was obliging. Perhaps because she did not, until Saeed’s conception
two decades later, get pregnant, and assumed therefore she could not, she was
able to have sex with abandon, without, that is, thought of consequences or the
distractions of child-rearing. Meanwhile his typical manner, throughout the first
half of their marriage, at her strenuous advances, was that of a man pleasantly
surprised. She found mustaches and being taken from behind erotic. He found
her carnal and motivating.
After Saeed was born, the frequency with which his parents had sex dipped
notably, and it continued to decline going forward. A uterus began to prolapse,
an erection became harder to maintain. During this phase, Saeed’s father started
to be cast, or to cast himself, more and more often, as the one who tried to
initiate sex. Saeed’s mother would sometimes wonder whether he did this out of
genuine desire or habit or simply for closeness. She tried her best to respond. He
would eventually come to be rebuffed by his own body at least as much as by
hers.
In the last year of the life they shared together, the year that was already well
under way when Saeed met Nadia, they had sex only thrice. As many times in a
year as on their wedding night. But his father always kept a mustache, at his
mother’s insistence. And they never once changed their bed: its headboard like
the posts of a banister, almost demanding to be gripped.
• • •
IN WHAT SAEED’S FAMILY called their living room there was a telescope, black
and sleek. It had been given to Saeed’s father by his father, and Saeed’s father
had given it in turn to Saeed, but since Saeed still lived at home, this meant the
telescope continued to sit where it always sat, on its tripod in a corner,
underneath an intricate clipper ship that sailed inside a glass bottle on the sea of
a triangular shelf.
The sky above their city had become too polluted for much in the way of
stargazing. But on cloudless nights after a daytime rain, Saeed’s father would
sometimes bring out the telescope, and the family would sip green tea on their
balcony, enjoying a breeze, and take turns to look up at objects whose light,
often, had been emitted before any of these three viewers had been born—light
from other centuries, only now reaching Earth. Saeed’s father called this timetravel.
On one particular night, though, in fact the night after he had struggled to
prepare his firm’s pitch to the soap company, Saeed was absentmindedly
scanning along a trajectory that ran below the horizon. In his eyepiece were
windows and walls and rooftops, sometimes stationary, sometimes whizzing by
at incredible speed.
“I think he’s looking at young ladies,” Saeed’s father said to his mother.
“Behave yourself, Saeed,” said his mother.
“Well, he is your son.”
“I never needed a telescope.”
“Yes, you preferred to operate short-range.”
Saeed shook his head and tacked upward.
“I see Mars,” he said. And indeed he did. The second-nearest planet, its
features indistinct, the color of a sunset after a dust storm.
Saeed straightened and held up his phone, directing its camera at the heavens,
consulting an application that indicated the names of celestial bodies he did not
know. The Mars it showed was more detailed as well, though it was of course a
Mars from another moment, a bygone Mars, fixed in memory by the
application’s creator.
In the distance Saeed’s family heard the sound of automatic gunfire, flat
cracks that were not loud and yet carried to them cleanly. They sat a little longer.
Then Saeed’s mother suggested they return inside.
• • •
WHEN SAEED AND NADIA finally had coffee together in the cafeteria, which
happened the following week, after the very next session of their class, Saeed
asked her about her conservative and virtually all-concealing black robe.
“If you don’t pray,” he said, lowering his voice, “why do you wear it?”
They were sitting at a table for two by a window, overlooking snarled traffic
on the street below. Their phones rested screens-down between them, like the
weapons of desperadoes at a parley.
She smiled. Took a sip. And spoke, the lower half of her face obscured by her
cup.
“So men don’t fuck with me,” she said.
TWO
WHEN NADIA WAS A CHILD, her favorite subject was art, even though art was
taught only once a week and she did not consider herself particularly
talented as an artist. She had gone to a school that emphasized rote
memorization, for which she was by temperament particularly ill-suited, and so
she spent a great deal of time doodling in the margins of her textbooks and
notebooks, hunched over to hide curlicues and miniature woodland universes
from the eyes of her teachers. If they caught her, she would get a scolding, or
occasionally a slap on the back of the head.
The art in Nadia’s childhood home consisted of religious verses and photos of
holy sites, framed and mounted on walls. Nadia’s mother and sister were quiet
women and her father a man who tried to be quiet, thinking this a virtue, but who
nonetheless came to a boil easily and often where Nadia was concerned. Her
constant questioning and growing irreverence in matters of faith upset and
frightened him. There was no physical violence in Nadia’s home, and much
giving to charity, but when after finishing university Nadia announced, to her
family’s utter horror, and to her own surprise for she had not planned to say it,
that she was moving out on her own, an unmarried woman, the break involved
hard words on all sides, from her father, from her mother, even more so from her
sister, and perhaps most of all from Nadia herself, such that Nadia and her
family both considered her thereafter to be without a family, something all of
them, all four, for the rest of their lives, regretted, but which none of them would
ever act to repair, partly out of stubbornness, partly out of bafflement at how to
go about doing so, and partly because the impending descent of their city into
the abyss would come before they realized that they had lost the chance.
Nadia’s experiences during her first months as a single woman living on her
own did, in some moments, equal or even surpass the loathsomeness and
dangerousness that her family had warned her about. But she had a job at an
insurance company, and she was determined to survive, and so she did. She
secured a room of her own atop the house of a widow, a record player and small
collection of vinyl, a circle of acquaintances among the city’s free spirits, and a
connection to a discreet and nonjudgmental female gynecologist. She learned
how to dress for self-protection, how best to deal with aggressive men and with
the police, and with aggressive men who were the police, and always to trust her
instincts about situations to avoid or to exit immediately.
But sitting at her desk at the insurance company, on an afternoon of handling
executive auto policy renewals by phone, when she received an instant message
from Saeed asking if she would like to meet, her work posture was still hunched
over, as it had been when she was a schoolgirl, and she was still doodling, as
always, in the margins of the printouts before her.
• • •
THEY MET at a Chinese restaurant of Nadia’s choosing, this not being a class
night. The family that used to run the place, after arriving in the city following
the Second World War, and flourishing there for three generations, had recently
sold up and emigrated to Canada. But prices remained reasonable, and the
standard of food had not yet fallen. The dining area had a darkened, opium-den
ambience, in contrast to other Chinese restaurants in the city. It was distinctively
lit by what looked like candle-filled paper lanterns, but were in fact plastic,
illuminated by flame-shaped, electronically flickering bulbs.
Nadia arrived first and watched Saeed enter and walk to her table. He had, as
he often did, an amused expression in his bright eyes, not mocking, but as
though he saw the humor in things, and this in turn amused her and made her
warm to him. She resisted smiling, knowing it would not be long for him to
smile, and indeed he smiled before reaching the table, and his smile was then
returned.
“I like it,” he said, indicating their surroundings. “Sort of mysterious. Like we
could be anywhere. Well, not anywhere, but not here.”
“Have you ever traveled abroad?”
He shook his head. “I want to.”
“Me too.”
“Where would you go?”
She considered him for a while. “Cuba.”
“Cuba! Why?”
“I don’t know. It makes me think of music and beautiful old buildings and the
sea.”
“Sounds perfect.”
“And you? Where would you pick? One place.”
“Chile.”
“So we both want to go to Latin America.”
He grinned. “The Atacama Desert. The air is so dry, so clear, and there’s so
few people, almost no lights. And you can lie on your back and look up and see
the Milky Way. All the stars like a splash of milk in the sky. And you see them
slowly move. Because the Earth is moving. And you feel like you’re lying on a
giant spinning ball in space.”
Nadia watched Saeed’s features. In that moment they were tinged with
wonder, and he looked, despite his stubble, boy-like. He struck her as a strange
sort of man. A strange and attractive sort of man.
Their waiter came to take their order. Neither Nadia nor Saeed chose a soft
drink, preferring tea and water, and when their food arrived neither used
chopsticks, both being, at least while under observation, more confident of their
skills with a fork instead. Despite initial instances of awkwardness, or rather of
disguised shyness, they found it mostly easy to talk to one another, which always
comes as something of a relief on a first proper date. They spoke quietly,
cautious not to attract the attention of nearby diners. Their meal was finished too
soon.
They next faced the problem that confronted all young people in the city who
wanted to continue in one another’s company past a certain hour. During the day
there were parks, and campuses, and restaurants, cafés. But at night, after dinner,
unless one had access to a home where such things were safe and permitted, or
had a car, there were few places to be alone. Saeed’s family had a car, but it was
being repaired, and so he had come by scooter. And Nadia had a home, but it
was tricky, in more ways than one, to have a man over.
Still, she decided to invite him.
Saeed seemed surprised and extremely excited when she suggested he come.
“Nothing is going to happen,” she explained. “I want to make that clear.
When I say you should come over, I’m not saying I want your hands on me.”
“No. Of course.”
Saeed’s expression had grown traumatized.
But Nadia nodded. And while her eyes were warm, she did not smile.
• • •
REFUGEES HAD OCCUPIED many of the open places in the city, pitching tents in the
greenbelts between roads, erecting lean-tos next to the boundary walls of houses,
sleeping rough on sidewalks and in the margins of streets. Some seemed to be
trying to re-create the rhythms of a normal life, as though it were completely
natural to be residing, a family of four, under a sheet of plastic propped up with
branches and a few chipped bricks. Others stared out at the city with what
looked like anger, or surprise, or supplication, or envy. Others didn’t move at all:
stunned, maybe, or resting. Possibly dying. Saeed and Nadia had to be careful
when making turns not to run over an outstretched arm or leg.
As she nosed her motorcycle home, followed by Saeed on his scooter, Nadia
did have several moments of questioning whether she had done the right thing.
But she didn’t change her mind.
There were two checkpoints on their way, one manned by police and another,
newer one, manned by soldiers. The police didn’t bother with them. The soldiers
stopped everyone. They made Nadia remove her helmet, perhaps thinking she
might be a man disguised as a woman, but when they saw this was not the case,
they waved her through.
Nadia rented the top portion of a narrow building belonging to a widow
whose children and grandchildren all lived abroad. This building had once been
a single house, but it was constructed adjacent to a market that had subsequently
grown past and around it. The widow had kept the middle floor for herself,
converted the bottom floor into a shop that she let out to a seller of car-batterybased residential-power-backup systems, and given the uppermost floor to
Nadia, who had overcome the widow’s initial suspicions by claiming that she
too was a widow, her husband a young infantry officer killed in battle, which,
admittedly, was less than entirely true.
Nadia’s flat comprised a studio room with an alcove kitchenette and a
bathroom so small that showering without drenching the commode was
impossible. But it opened onto a roof terrace that looked out over the market and
was, when the electricity had not gone out, bathed in the soft and shimmying
glow of a large, animated neon sign that towered nearby in the service of a zerocalorie carbonated beverage.
Nadia told Saeed to wait at a short distance, in a darkened alley around the
corner, while she unlocked a metal grill door and entered the building alone.
Once upstairs she threw a quilt over her bed and pushed her dirty clothes into the
closet. She filled a small shopping bag, paused another minute, and dropped it
out a window.
The bag landed beside Saeed with a muffled thump. He opened it, found her
spare downstairs key, and also one of her black robes, which he furtively pulled
on over his own outfit, covering his head with its hood, and then, with a mincing
gait that reminded her of a stage-play robber, he approached the front door,
unlocked it, and a minute later appeared at her apartment, where she motioned
him to sit.
Nadia selected a record, an album sung by a long-dead woman who was once
an icon of a style that in her American homeland was quite justifiably called
soul, her so-alive but no longer living voice conjuring up from the past a third
presence in a room that presently contained only two, and asked Saeed if he
would like a joint, to which he fortunately said yes, and which he offered to roll.
• • •
WHILE NADIA AND SAEED were sharing their first spliff together, in the Tokyo
district of Shinjuku where midnight had already come and gone, and so,
technically, the next day had already commenced, a young man was nursing a
drink for which he had not paid and yet to which he was entitled. His whiskey
came from Ireland, a place he had never been to but evinced a mild fondness for,
perhaps because Ireland was like the Shikoku of a parallel universe, not
dissimilar in shape, and likewise slung on the ocean-ward side of a larger island
at one end of the vast Eurasian landmass, or perhaps because of an Irish gangster
film he had gone to see repeatedly in his still-impressionable youth.
The man wore a suit and a crisp white shirt and therefore any tattoos he had
or did not have on his arms would not be visible. He was stocky but, when he
got to his feet, elegant in his movements. His eyes were sober, flat, despite the
drink, and not eyes that attracted the eyes of others. Gazes leapt away from his
gaze, as they might among packs of dogs in the wild, in which a hierarchy is set
by some sensed quality of violent potential.
Outside the bar he lit a cigarette. The street was bright from illuminated
signage but relatively quiet. A pair of drunk salarymen passed him at a safe
distance, then an off-the-clock club hostess, taking quick steps and staring at the
pavement. The clouds above Tokyo hung low, reflecting dull red back at the
city, but a breeze was now blowing, he felt it on his skin and in his hair, a sense
of brine and slight chill. He held the smoke in his lungs and released it slowly. It
disappeared in the wind’s flow.
He was surprised to hear a noise behind him, because the alley to his rear was
a cul-de-sac and empty when he came outside. He had examined it, out of habit
and quickly, but not carelessly, before turning his back. Now there were two
Filipina girls, in their late teens, neither probably yet twenty, standing beside a
disused door to the rear of the bar, a door that was always kept locked, but was
in this moment somehow open, a portal of complete blackness, as though no
light were on inside, almost as though no light could penetrate inside. The girls
were dressed strangely, in clothing that was too thin, tropical, not the kind of
clothing you normally saw Filipinas wear in Tokyo, or anyone else at this time
of year. One of them had knocked over an empty beer bottle. It was rolling,
high-pitched, in a scurrying arc away.
They did not look at him. He had the feeling they did not know what to make
of him. They spoke in hushed tones as they passed, their words unintelligible,
but recognized by him as Tagalog. They seemed emotional: perhaps excited,
perhaps frightened, perhaps both—in any case, the man thought, with women it
was difficult to tell. They were in his territory. Not the first time this week that
he had seen a group of Filipinos who seemed oddly clueless in his bit of town.
He disliked Filipinos. They had their place, but they had to know their place.
There had been a half-Filipino boy in his junior high school class whom he had
beaten often, once so badly that he would have been expelled, had someone been
willing to say who had done it.
He watched the girls walk. Considered.
And slipped into a walk behind them, fingering the metal in his pocket as he
went.
• • •
IN TIMES OF VIOLENCE, there is always that first acquaintance or intimate of ours,
who, when they are touched, makes what had seemed like a bad dream suddenly,
evisceratingly real. For Nadia this person was her cousin, a man of considerable
determination and intellect, who even when he was young had never cared much
for play, who seemed to laugh only rarely, who had won medals in school and
decided to become a doctor, who had successfully emigrated abroad, who
returned once a year to visit his parents, and who, along with eighty-five others,
was blown by a truck bomb to bits, literally to bits, the largest of which, in
Nadia’s cousin’s case, were a head and two-thirds of an arm.
Nadia did not hear of her cousin’s death in time to attend the funeral, and she
did not visit her relatives, not for lack of emotion but because she wanted to
avoid being the cause of unpleasantness. She had planned to go to the graveyard
alone, but Saeed had called her and asked through her silences what was the
matter, and she had somehow told him, and he had offered to join her, insisted
without insisting, which strangely came as a kind of relief. So they went
together, very early the following morning, and saw the rounded mound of fresh
earth, garlanded with flowers, above her cousin’s partial remains. Saeed stood
and prayed. Nadia did not offer a prayer, or scatter rose petals, but knelt down
and put her hand on the mound, damp from the recent visit of a grave-tender
with a watering can, and shut her eyes for a long while, as the sound of a jetliner
descending to the nearby airport came and went.
They had breakfast at a café, coffee and some bread with butter and jam, and
she spoke, but not of her cousin, and Saeed seemed very present, comfortable
being there on that unusual morning, with her not talking of what was most of
consequence, and she felt things change between them, become more solid, in a
way. Then Nadia went to the insurance company that employed her, handled
fleet policies until lunch. Her tone was steady and businesslike. The callers she
dealt with only rarely said words that were inappropriate. Or asked her for her
personal number. Which, when they did, she would not give.
• • •
NADIA HAD BEEN SEEING a musician for some time. They had met at an
underground concert, more a jam session really, with perhaps fifty or sixty
people crammed into the soundproofed premises of a recording studio that
specialized increasingly in audio work for television—the local music business
being, for reasons of both security and piracy, in rather difficult straits. She had,
as was by then usual for her, been wearing her black robe, closed to her neck,
and he had, as was by then usual for him, been wearing a size-too-small white Tshirt, pinned to his lean chest and stomach, and she had watched him and he had
circled her, and they had gone to his place that night, and she had shuffled off
the weight of her virginity with some perplexity but not excessive fuss.
They rarely spoke on the telephone and met only sporadically, and she
suspected he had many other women. She did not want to inquire. She
appreciated his comfort with his own body, and his wanton attitude to hers, and
the rhythm and strum of his touch, and his beauty, his animal beauty, and the
pleasure he evoked in her. She thought she mattered little to him, but in this she
was mistaken, as the musician was quite smitten, and not nearly so unattached to
her as she supposed, but pride, and also fear, and also style, kept him from
asking more of her than she offered up. He berated himself for this subsequently,
but not too much, even though after their last meeting he would not stop thinking
of her until his death, which was, though neither of them then knew it, only a
few short months away.
Nadia at first thought there was no need to say goodbye, that saying goodbye
involved a kind of presumption, but then she felt a small sadness, and knew she
needed to say goodbye, not for him, for she doubted he would care, but for her.
And since they had little to say to one another by phone and instant message
seemed too impersonal, she decided to say it in person, outdoors, in a public
place, not at his messy, musky apartment, where she trusted herself less, but
when she said it, he invited her up, “for one last time,” and she intended to say
no but actually said yes, and the sex they had was passionate farewell sex, and it
was, not unsurprisingly, surprisingly good.
Later in life she would sometimes wonder what became of him, and she
would never know.
• • •
THE FOLLOWING EVENING helicopters filled the sky like birds startled by a
gunshot, or by the blow of an axe at the base of their tree. They rose, singly and
in pairs, and fanned out above the city in the reddening dusk, as the sun slipped
below the horizon, and the whir of their rotors echoed through windows and
down alleys, seemingly compressing the air beneath them, as though each were
mounted atop an invisible column, an invisible breathable cylinder, these odd,
hawkish, mobile sculptures, some thin, with tandem canopies, pilot and gunner
at different heights, and some fat, full of personnel, chopping, chopping through
the heavens.
Saeed watched them with his parents from their balcony. Nadia watched them
from her rooftop, alone.
Through an open door, a young soldier looked down upon their city, a city
not overly familiar to him, for he had grown up in the countryside, and was
struck by how big it was, how grand its towers and lush its parks. The din around
him was incredible, and his belly lurched as he swerved.
THREE
NADIA AND SAEED WERE, back then, always in possession of their phones. In
their phones were antennas, and these antennas sniffed out an invisible
world, as if by magic, a world that was all around them, and also nowhere,
transporting them to places distant and near, and to places that had never been
and would never be. For many decades after independence a telephone line in
their city had remained a rare thing, the waiting list for a connection long, the
teams that installed the copper wires and delivered the heavy handsets greeted
and revered and bribed like heroes. But now wands waved in the city’s air,
untethered and free, phones in the millions, and a number could be obtained in
minutes, for a pittance.
Saeed partly resisted the pull of his phone. He found the antenna too
powerful, the magic it summoned too mesmerizing, as though he were eating a
banquet of limitless food, stuffing himself, stuffing himself, until he felt dazed
and sick, and so he had removed or hidden or restricted all but a few
applications. His phone could make calls. His phone could send messages. His
phone could take pictures, identify celestial bodies, transform the city into a map
while he drove. But that was it. Mostly. Except for the hour each evening that he
enabled the browser on his phone and disappeared down the byways of the
internet. But this hour was tightly regulated, and when it ended, a timer would
set off an alarm, a gentle, windy chime, as though from the breezy planet of
some blue-shimmering science fiction priestess, and he would electronically lock
away his browser and not browse again on his phone until the following day.
Yet even this pared-back phone, this phone stripped of so much of its
potential, allowed him to access Nadia’s separate existence, at first hesitantly,
and then more frequently, at any time of day or night, allowed him to start to
enter into her thoughts, as she toweled herself after a shower, as she ate a light
dinner alone, as she sat at her desk hard at work, as she reclined on her toilet
after emptying her bladder. He made her laugh, once, then again, and again, he
made her skin burn and her breath shorten with the surprised beginnings of
arousal, he became present without presence, and she did much the same to him.
Soon a rhythm was established, and it was thereafter rare that more than a few
waking hours would pass without contact between them, and they found
themselves in those early days of their romance growing hungry, touching each
other, but without bodily adjacency, without release. They had begun, each of
them, to be penetrated, but they had not yet kissed.
In contrast to Saeed, Nadia saw no need to limit her phone. It kept her
company on long evenings, as it did countless young people in the city who were
likewise stranded in their homes, and she rode it far out into the world on
otherwise solitary, stationary nights. She watched bombs falling, women
exercising, men copulating, clouds gathering, waves tugging at the sand like the
rasping licks of so many mortal, temporary, vanishing tongues, tongues of a
planet that would one day too be no more.
Nadia frequently explored the terrain of social media, though she left little
trace of her passing, not posting much herself, and employing opaque usernames
and avatars, the online equivalents of her black robes. It was through social
media that Nadia ordered the shrooms Saeed and she would eat on the night they
first became physically intimate, shrooms still being available for cash-ondemand couriered delivery in their city in those days. The police and antinarcotic agencies were focused on other, more market-leading substances, and to
the unsuspecting, fungi, whether hallucinogenic or portobello, all seemed the
same, and innocuous enough, a fact exploited by a middle-aged local man with a
ponytail who ran a small side business that offered rare ingredients for chefs and
epicures, and yet was followed and liked in cyberspace mostly by the young.
In a few months this ponytailed man would be beheaded, nape-first with a
serrated knife to enhance discomfort, his headless body strung up by one ankle
from an electricity pylon where it swayed legs akimbo until the shoelace his
executioner used instead of rope rotted and gave way, no one daring to cut him
down before that.
But even now the city’s freewheeling virtual world stood in stark contrast to
the day-to-day lives of most people, to those of young men, and especially of
young women, and above all of children who went to sleep unfed but could see
on some small screen people in foreign lands preparing and consuming and even
conducting food fights with feasts of such opulence that the very fact of their
existence boggled the mind.
Online there was sex and security and plenty and glamour. On the street, the
day before Nadia’s shrooms arrived, there was a burly man at the red light of a
deserted late-night intersection who turned to Nadia and greeted her, and when
she ignored him, began to swear at her, saying only a whore would drive a
motorcycle, didn’t she know it was obscene for a woman to straddle a bike in
that way, had she ever seen anyone else doing it, who did she think she was, and
swearing with such ferocity that she thought he might attack her, as she stood
her ground, looking at him, visor down, heart pounding, but with her grip firm
on clutch and throttle, her hands ready to speed her away, surely faster than he
could follow on his tired-looking scooter, until he shook his head and drove off
with a shout, a sort of strangled scream, a sound that could have been rage, or
equally could have been anguish.
• • •
THE SHROOMS ARRIVED first thing the following morning at Nadia’s office, their
uniformed courier having no idea what was inside the package Nadia was
signing and paying for, other than that it was listed as foodstuffs. Around the
same time, a group of militants was taking over the city’s stock exchange. Nadia
and her colleagues spent much of that day staring at the television next to their
floor’s water cooler, but by afternoon it was over, the army having decided any
risk to hostages was less than the risk to national security should this mediasavvy and morale-sapping spectacle be allowed to continue, and so the building
was stormed with maximum force, and the militants were exterminated, and
initial estimates put the number of dead workers at probably less than a hundred.
Nadia and Saeed had been messaging each other throughout, and initially
they thought they would cancel their rendezvous planned for that evening,
Saeed’s second invitation to her home, but when no curfew was announced,
much to people’s surprise, the authorities perhaps wishing to signal that they
were in such complete control that none was needed, both Nadia and Saeed
found themselves unsettled and craving each other’s company, and so they
decided to go ahead and meet after all.
Saeed’s family’s car had been repaired, and he drove it to Nadia’s instead of
riding his scooter, feeling somehow less exposed in an enclosed vehicle. But
while weaving through traffic his side mirror scraped the door of a shiny black
luxury SUV, the conveyance of some industrialist or bigwig, costing more than a
house, and Saeed steeled himself for a shouting, perhaps even a beating, but the
guard who stepped out of the front passenger-side door of the SUV, assault rifle
pointed skyward, merely had time to look at Saeed, a smooth, ferocious glance,
before being summoned back in, and the SUV sped off, its owner clearly not
wishing, on this night, to tarry.
• • •
SAEED PARKED around the corner from Nadia’s building, messaged that he had
arrived, awaited the thump of the falling plastic bag, slipped into the robe that it
contained, and then hurried in and upstairs, much as he had before, except that
this time he came bearing bags of his own, bags of barbecued chicken and lamb
and hot, fresh-made bread. Nadia took the food from him and put it in her oven
so that it might remain insulated and warm—but this precaution
notwithstanding, their dinner would be cold when finally eaten, lying there
disregarded until dawn.
Nadia led Saeed outside. She had placed a long cushion, its cover woven like
a rug, on the floor of her terrace, and she sat on this cushion with her back
against the parapet and motioned for Saeed to do the same. As he sat he felt the
outside of her thigh, firm, against his, and she felt the outside of his, likewise
firm, against hers.
She said, “Aren’t you going to take that off?”
She meant the black robe, which he had forgotten he was wearing, and he
looked down at himself and over at her, and smiled, and answered, “You first.”
She laughed. “Together, then.”
“Together.”
They stood and pulled off their robes, facing each other, and underneath both
were wearing jeans and sweaters, there being a nip in the air tonight, and his
sweater was brown and loose and hers was beige and clung to her torso like a
soft second skin. He attempted chivalrously not to take in the sweep of her body,
his eyes holding hers, but of course, as we know often happens in such
circumstances, he was unsure as to whether or not he had succeeded, one’s gaze
being less than entirely conscious a phenomenon.
They sat back down and she placed her fist on her thigh, palm up, and opened
it.
“Have you ever done psychedelic mushrooms?” she asked.
• • •
THEY SPOKE QUIETLY under the clouds, glimpsing occasionally a gash of moon or
of darkness, and otherwise seeing ripples and churns of city-lit gray. It was all
very normal at first, and Saeed wondered if she was perhaps teasing him, or if
she had been deceived and sold a dud batch. Soon he had concluded that by
some quirk of biology or psychology he was simply, and unfortunately, resistant
to whatever it was that mushrooms were supposed to do.
So he was unprepared for the feeling of awe that came over him, the wonder
with which he then regarded his own skin, and the lemon tree in its clay pot on
Nadia’s terrace, as tall as he was, and rooted in its soil, which was in turn rooted
in the clay of the pot, which rested upon the brick of the terrace, which was like
the mountaintop of this building, which was growing from the earth itself, and
from this earthy mountain the lemon tree was reaching up, up, in a gesture so
beautiful that Saeed was filled with love, and reminded of his parents, for whom
he suddenly felt such gratitude, and a desire for peace, that peace should come
for them all, for everyone, for everything, for we are so fragile, and so beautiful,
and surely conflicts could be healed if others had experiences like this, and then
he regarded Nadia and saw that she was regarding him and her eyes were like
worlds.
They did not hold hands until Saeed’s perspective had returned, hours later,
not to normal, for he suspected it was possible he might never think of normal in
the same way again, but to something closer to what it had been before they had
eaten these shrooms, and when they held hands it was facing each other, sitting,
their wrists resting on their knees, their knees almost touching, and then he
leaned forward and she leaned forward, and she smiled, and they kissed, and
they realized that it was dawn, and they were no longer hidden by darkness, and
they might be seen from some other rooftop, so they went inside and ate the cold
food, not much but some, and it was strong in flavor.
• • •
SAEED’S PHONE HAD DIED and he charged it in his family’s car from a backup
battery source he kept in the glove compartment, and as his phone turned on it
beeped and chirped with his parents’ panic, their missed calls, their messages,
their mounting terror at a child not returned safely that night, a night when many
children of many parents did not return at all.
Upon Saeed’s arrival his father went to bed and in his bedside mirror
glimpsed a suddenly much older man, and his mother was so relieved to see her
son that she thought, for a moment, she should slap him.
• • •
NADIA DID NOT FEEL like sleeping, and so she took a shower, the water chilly
because of the intermittent gas supply to her boiler. She stood naked, as she had
been born, and put on her jeans and T-shirt and sweater, as she did when alone at
home, and then put on her robe, ready to resist the claims and expectations of the
world, and stepped outside to go for a walk in a nearby park that would by now
be emptying of its early-morning junkies and of the gay lovers who had departed
their houses with more time than they needed for the errands they had said they
were heading out to accomplish.
• • •
LATER THAT DAY, in the evening, Nadia’s time, the sun having slipped below her
horizon, it was morning in the San Diego, California, locality of La Jolla, where
an old man lived by the sea, or rather on a bluff overlooking the Pacific Ocean.
The fittings in his house were worn but painstakingly repaired, as was his
garden: home to mesquite trees and desert willows and succulent plants that had
seen better years, but were still alive and mostly free of blight.
The old man had served in the navy during one of the larger wars and he had
respect for the uniform, and for these young men who had established a
perimeter around his property, as he watched, standing on the street with their
commanding officer. They reminded him of when he was their age and had their
strength and their suppleness of movement and their certainty of purpose and
their bond with one another, that bond he and his friends used to say was like
that of brothers, but was in some ways stronger than that of brothers, or at least
than his bond with his own brother, his kid brother, who had passed last spring
from cancer of the throat that had withered him to the weight of a young girl,
and who had not spoken to the old man for years, and when the old man had
gone to see him in the hospital could no longer speak, could only look, and in his
eyes was exhaustion but not so much fear, brave eyes, on a kid brother the old
man had never before thought of as brave.
The officer didn’t have time for the old man but he had time for his age and
for his service record, and so he allowed the old man to linger nearby for a while
before saying with a polite dip of his head that it would be best if he now moved
on.
The old man asked the officer whether it was Mexicans that had been coming
through, or was it Muslims, because he couldn’t be sure, and the officer said he
couldn’t answer, sir. So the old man stood silent for a bit and the officer let him,
as cars were diverted and told to go some other way, and as rich neighbors who
had bought their properties more recently sat at their front windows and stared,
and in the end the old man asked how he could help.
The old man felt like a child suddenly, asking this. The officer was young
enough to be his grandson.
The officer said they’d let him know, sir.
I’ll let you know: that’s what the old man’s father used to say to him when he
was pestering. And in some ways the officer did look like his father, more like
his father than like the old man anyway, like his father when the old man was
just a boy.
The officer offered to arrange for the old man to be dropped off if he wanted,
with kin maybe, or friends.
It was a warm early winter’s day, clear and sunny. Far below, the surfers
were paddling out in their wetsuits. Above the ocean, in the distance, the gray
transport planes were lining up to land at Coronado.
The old man wondered where he should go, and thinking about it, realized he
couldn’t come up with a single place.
• • •
AFTER THE ASSAULT on the stock exchange of Saeed and Nadia’s city, it seemed
the militants had changed strategy, and grown in confidence, and instead of
merely detonating a bomb here or orchestrating a shooting there, they began
taking over and holding territory throughout the city, sometimes a building,
sometimes an entire neighborhood, for hours usually, but on occasion for days.
How so many of them were arriving so quickly from their bastions in the hills
remained a mystery, but the city was vast and sprawling and impossible to
disconnect from the surrounding countryside. Besides, the militants were well
known to have sympathizers within.
The curfew Saeed’s parents had been waiting for was duly imposed, and
enforced with hair-trigger zeal, not just sandbagged checkpoints and razor wire
proliferating but also howitzers and infantry fighting vehicles and tanks with
their turrets clad in the rectangular barnacles of explosive reactive armor. Saeed
went with his father to pray on the first Friday after the curfew’s
commencement, and Saeed prayed for peace and Saeed’s father prayed for Saeed
and the preacher in his sermon urged all the congregants to pray for the righteous
to emerge victorious in the war but carefully refrained from specifying on which
side of the conflict he thought the righteous to be.
Saeed’s father felt as he walked back to campus and his son drove back to
work that he had made a mistake with his career, that he should have done
something else with his life, because then he might have had the money to send
Saeed abroad. Perhaps he had been selfish, his notion of helping the youth and
the country through teaching and research merely an expression of vanity, and
the far more decent path would have been to pursue wealth at all costs.
Saeed’s mother prayed at home, newly particular about not missing a single
one of her devotions, but she insisted on claiming that nothing had changed, that
the city had seen similar crises before, though she could not say when, and that
the local press and foreign media were exaggerating the danger. She did,
however, develop difficulties sleeping, and obtained from her pharmacist, a
woman she trusted not to gossip, a sedative to take secretly before bed.
At Saeed’s office work was slow even though three of his fellow employees
had stopped showing up and there ought to have been more to do for those who
were still present. Conversations focused mainly on conspiracy theories, the
status of the fighting, and how to get out of the country—and since visas, which
had long been near-impossible, were now truly impossible for non-wealthy
people to secure, and journeys on passenger planes and ships were therefore out
of the question, the relative merits, or rather risks, of the various overland routes
were guessed at, and picked apart, again and again.
At Nadia’s workplace it was much the same, with the added intrigue that
came from her boss and her boss’s boss being among those rumored to have fled
abroad, since neither had returned as scheduled from their holidays. Their offices
sat empty behind glass partitions at the prow and stern of the oblong floor—an
abandoned suit hanging in its dust cover on a hat rack in one—while the rows of
open-plan desks between them remained largely occupied, including Nadia’s, at
which she was often to be seen on her phone.
• • •
NADIA AND SAEED BEGAN to meet during the day, typically for lunch at a cheap
burger joint equidistant from their workplaces, with deep booths at the back that
were somewhat private, and there they held hands beneath the table, and
sometimes he stroked the inside of her thigh and she placed her palm on the
zipper of his trousers, but only briefly, and rarely, in the gaps when it appeared
waiters and fellow diners were not looking, and they tormented each other in this
way, since travel between dusk and dawn was forbidden, and so they could not
be alone without Saeed spending the entire night, which seemed to her a step
well worth taking, but to him something they should delay, in part, he said,
because he did not know what to tell his parents and in part because he feared
leaving them alone.
Mostly they communicated by phone, a message here, a link to an article
there, a shared image of one or the other of them at work, or at home, before a
window as the sun set or a breeze blew or a funny expression came and went.
Saeed was certain he was in love. Nadia was not certain what exactly she was
feeling, but she was certain it had force. Dramatic circumstances, such as those
in which they and other new lovers in the city now found themselves, have a
habit of creating dramatic emotions, and furthermore the curfew served to
conjure up an effect similar to that of a long-distance relationship, and long-
distance relationships are well known for their potential to heighten passion, at
least for a while, just as fasting is well known to heighten one’s appreciation for
food.
• • •
THE FIRST TWO WEEKENDS of the curfew came and went without them meeting,
outbursts of fighting making travel first in Saeed’s neighborhood and then in
Nadia’s impossible, and Saeed forwarded to Nadia a popular joke about the
militants politely wishing to ensure that the city’s population was well rested on
their days off. Air strikes were called in by the army on both occasions,
shattering Saeed’s bathroom window while he was in the shower, and shaking
like an earthquake Nadia and her lemon tree as she sat on her terrace smoking a
joint. Fighter-bombers grated hoarsely through the sky.
But on the third weekend there was a lull and Saeed went to Nadia’s and she
met him in a nearby café since it was too risky for her to drop a robe into the
street by day, or for him to change outdoors, and so he pulled it on in the café’s
bathroom while she paid the bill and then with his head covered and eyes on the
ground, followed her into her building, and once upstairs and inside they soon
slipped into her bed and were nearly naked together and after much pleasure but
also what she considered a bit excessive a delay on his part she asked if he had
brought a condom and he held her face in his hands and said, “I don’t think we
should have sex until we’re married.”
And she laughed and pressed close.
And he shook his head.
And she stopped and stared at him and said, “Are you fucking joking?”
• • •
FOR A SECOND Nadia was seized by a wild fury but then as she looked at Saeed he
appeared almost lethally mortified and a coil loosened in her and she smiled a
little and she held him tight, to torture him and to test him, and she said,
surprising herself, “It’s okay. We can see.”
• • •
LATER AS THEY LAY in bed listening to an old and slightly scratched bossa nova
LP, Saeed showed her on his phone images by a French photographer of famous
cities at night, lit only by the glow of the stars.
“But how did he get everyone to turn their lights off?” Nadia asked.
“He didn’t,” Saeed said. “He just removed the lighting. By computer, I
think.”
“And he left the stars bright.”
“No, above these cities you can barely see the stars. Just like here. He had to
go to deserted places. Places with no human lights. For each city’s sky he went
to a deserted place that was just as far north, or south, at the same latitude
basically, the same place that the city would be in a few hours, with the Earth’s
spin, and once he got there he pointed his camera in the same direction.”
“So he got the same sky the city would have had if it was completely dark?”
“The same sky, but at a different time.”
Nadia thought about this. They were achingly beautiful, these ghostly cities—
New York, Rio, Shanghai, Paris—under their stains of stars, images as though
from an epoch before electricity, but with the buildings of today. Whether they
looked like the past, or the present, or the future, she couldn’t decide.
• • •
THE FOLLOWING WEEK it appeared that the government’s massive show of force
was succeeding. There were no major new attacks in the city. There were even
rumors that the curfew might be relaxed.
But one day the signal to every mobile phone in the city simply vanished,
turned off as if by flipping a switch. An announcement of the government’s
decision was made over television and radio, a temporary antiterrorism measure,
it was said, but with no end date given. Internet connectivity was suspended as
well.
Nadia did not have a landline at home. Saeed’s landline had not worked in
months. Deprived of the portals to each other and to the world provided by their
mobile phones, and confined to their apartments by the nighttime curfew, Nadia
and Saeed, and countless others, felt marooned and alone and much more afraid.
FOUR
THE EVENING CLASS Saeed and Nadia had been taking was finished, having
concluded with the arrival of the first dense smogs of winter, and in any case
the curfew meant courses such as theirs could not have continued. Neither of
them had been to the other’s office, so they didn’t know where to reach one
another during the day, and without their mobile phones and access to the
internet there was no ready way for them to reestablish contact. It was as if they
were bats that had lost the use of their ears, and hence their ability to find things
as they flew in the dark. The day after their phone signals died Saeed went to
their usual burger joint at lunchtime, but Nadia did not show, and the day after
that, when he went again, the restaurant was shuttered, its owner perhaps having
fled, or simply disappeared.
Saeed was aware that Nadia worked at an insurance company, and from his
office he called the operator and asked for the names and numbers of insurance
companies, and tried phoning them all, one by one, inquiring for her at each.
This took time: the telephone company was struggling under the sudden load and
also to repair infrastructure destroyed in the fighting, and so Saeed’s office
landline worked at best intermittently, and when it did, an operator could be
swatted out of the swarm of busy tones only rarely, and that operator was—
despite Saeed’s desperate entreaties, desperate entreaties being common in those
days—limited to giving out a maximum of two numbers per call, and when
Saeed finally did obtain a new pair of numbers to try, more often than not one or
both proved to be nonfunctional on any given day, and he had to ring and ring
and ring again.
Nadia spent her lunch hours racing home to stock up on supplies. She bought
bags of flour and rice and nuts and dried fruit, and bottles of oil, and cans of
powdered milk and cured meat and fish in brine, all at exorbitant prices, her
forearms aching from the strain of carrying them up to her apartment, one load
after another. She was fond of eating vegetables but people said the key was to
have as many calories stashed away as possible, and so foods like vegetables,
which were bulky for the amount of energy they could provide, and also prone to
spoilage, were less useful. But soon the shelves of shops near her were close to
bare, even of vegetables, and when the government instituted a policy that no
one person could buy more than a certain amount per day, Nadia, like many
others, was both panicked and relieved.
On the weekend she went at dawn to her bank and stood in a line that was
already quite long, waiting for the bank to open, but when it opened the line
became a throng and she had no choice but to surge forward like everyone else,
and there in the unruly crowd she was groped from behind, someone pushing his
hand down her buttocks and between her legs, and trying to penetrate her with
his finger, failing because he was outside the multiple fabrics of her robe and her
jeans and her underclothes, but coming as close to succeeding as possible under
the circumstances, applying incredible force, as she was pinned by the bodies
around her, unable to move or even raise her hands, and so stunned she could not
shout, or speak, reduced to clamping her thighs together and her jaws together,
her mouth shutting automatically, almost physiologically, instinctively, her body
sealing itself off, and then the crowd moved and the finger was gone and not
long afterwards some bearded men separated the mob into two halves, male and
female, and she stayed inside the female zone, and her turn at the teller did not
come until after lunch, whereupon she took as much cash as was permitted,
hiding it on her person and in her boots and putting only a little in her bag, and
she went to a money changer to convert some of it into dollars and euros and to a
jeweler to convert the remainder to a few very small coins of gold, glancing over
her shoulder constantly to make sure she wasn’t being followed, and then headed
home, only to find a man waiting at the entrance, looking for her, and when she
saw him she steeled herself and refused to cry, even though she was bruised and
frightened and furious, and the man, who had been waiting all day, was Saeed.
She led him upstairs, forgetting that they might be seen, or not caring, and so
not bothering this once with a robe for him, and upstairs she made them both tea,
her hands trembling, finding it difficult to speak. She was embarrassed and angry
that she was this glad to see him, and felt she might start yelling at him at any
moment, and he could see how upset she was and so he silently opened the bags
he had brought and gave her a kerosene camping stove, some extra fuel, a large
box of matches, fifty candles, and a packet of chlorine tablets for disinfecting
water.
“I couldn’t find flowers,” he said.
She smiled at last, a half-smile, and asked, “Do you have a gun?”
• • •
THEY SMOKED A JOINT and listened to music and after a while Nadia tried again to
make Saeed have sex with her, not because she felt particularly sexy but because
she wanted to cauterize the incident from outside the bank in her memory, and
Saeed succeeded again in holding back, even as they pleasured each other, and
he told her again that they should not have sex before they were married, that
doing otherwise was against his beliefs, but it was not until he suggested she
move in with his parents and him that she understood his words had been a kind
of proposal.
She stroked his hair as his head rested on her chest and asked, “Are you
saying you want to get married?”
“Yes.”
“To me?”
“To anyone, really.”
She snorted.
“Yes,” he said, rising and looking at her. “To you.”
She didn’t say anything.
“What do you think?” he asked.
She felt great tenderness well up in her for him at that moment, as he waited
for her reply, and she felt also a galloping terror, and she felt further something
altogether more complicated, something that struck her as akin to resentment.
“I don’t know,” she said.
He kissed her. “Okay,” he replied.
As he was leaving, she saved his office details and he saved hers, and she
gave him a black robe to wear, and she told him not to bother stashing it in the
crack between her building and the next, where previously he had been hiding
the robes he exited in for her to collect, but rather to hold on to it, and she gave
him a set of keys too. “So my sister can let herself in next time, if she arrives
before me,” she explained.
And both of them grinned.
But when he was gone she heard the demolition blows of distant artillery, the
unmaking of buildings, large-scale fighting having resumed somewhere, and she
was worried for him on his drive home, and she thought it an absurd situation
that she would have to wait until she went to work the following day to discover
whether he had traversed the distance to his home safely.
Nadia bolted her door and laboriously pushed her sofa against it, so that it
was now barricaded from within.
• • •
THAT NIGHT, in a rooftop flat not unlike Nadia’s, in a neighborhood not far from
Nadia’s, a brave man stood in the light of a torch built into his mobile phone and
waited. He could hear, from time to time, the same artillery that Nadia could
hear, though more loudly. It rattled the windows of his flat, but only in a gentle
way, without any risk, at present, of them breaking. The brave man did not have
a wristwatch, or a flashlight, so his signal-less phone served both functions, and
he wore a heavy winter jacket and inside his jacket were a pistol and a knife with
a blade as long as his hand.
Another man had begun to emerge from a black door at the far end of the
room, a door black even in the dimness, black despite the beam of the phonetorch, and this second man the brave man watched from his post beside the front
door but did nothing visibly to help. The brave man merely listened to the
sounds in the stairwell outside, for a lack of sound in the stairwell outside, and
stood at his post and held his phone and fingered the pistol inside the pocket of
his coat, observing without making any noise.
The brave man was excited, though it would have been difficult to see this in
the gloom and in the customary inexpressiveness of his face. He was ready to
die, but he did not plan on dying, he planned on living, and he planned on doing
great things while he did.
The second man lay on the floor and shaded his eyes from the light and
gathered his strength, a knockoff Russian assault rifle by his side. He could not
see who was at the front door, just that someone was there.
The brave man stood with his hand on his pistol, listening, listening.
The second man got to his feet.
The brave man motioned with the light of his phone, pulling the second man
forward, like a needle-jawed anglerfish might, hunting in the inky depths, and
when the second man was close enough to touch, the brave man opened the front
door of the flat, and the second man walked through into the quietness of the
stairwell. And then the brave man shut the door and stood still once again, biding
his time for another.
• • •
THE SECOND MAN JOINED the fighting within the hour, among many who would do
so, and the battles that now commenced and raged without meaningful
interruption were far more ferocious, and less unequal, than what had come
before.
War in Saeed and Nadia’s city revealed itself to be an intimate experience,
combatants pressed close together, front lines defined at the level of the street
one took to work, the school one’s sister attended, the house of one’s aunt’s best
friend, the shop where one bought cigarettes. Saeed’s mother thought she saw a
former student of hers firing with much determination and focus a machine gun
mounted on the back of a pickup truck. She looked at him and he looked at her
and he did not turn and shoot her, and so she suspected it was him, although
Saeed’s father said it meant nothing more than that she had seen a man who
wished to fire in another direction. She remembered the boy as shy, with a stutter
and a quick mind for mathematics, a good boy, but she could not remember his
name. She wondered if it had really been him, and whether she should feel
alarmed or relieved if it had. If the militants won, she supposed, it might not be
entirely bad to know people on their side.
Neighborhoods fell to the militants in startlingly quick succession, so that
Saeed’s mother’s mental map of the place where she had spent her entire life
now resembled an old quilt, with patches of government land and patches of
militant land. The frayed seams between the patches were the most deadly
spaces, and to be avoided at all costs. Her butcher and the man who dyed the
fabrics from which she had once had made her festive clothes disappeared into
such gaps, their places of business shattered and covered in rubble and glass.
People vanished in those days, and for the most part one never knew, at least
not for a while, if they were alive or dead. Nadia passed her family’s home once
on purpose, not to speak with them, just to see from the outside if they were
there and well, but the home she had forsaken looked deserted, with no sign of
inhabitants or life. When she visited again it was gone, unrecognizable, the
building crushed by the force of a bomb that weighed as much as a compact
automobile. Nadia would never be able to determine what had become of them,
but she always hoped they had found a way to depart unharmed, abandoning the
city to the predations of warriors on both sides who seemed content to flatten it
in order to possess it.
She and Saeed were fortunate that their homes remained for a while in
government-controlled neighborhoods, and so were spared much of the worst
fighting and also the retaliatory air strikes that the army was calling in on
localities thought not merely to be occupied but disloyal.
Saeed’s boss had tears in his eyes as he told his employees that he had to
shutter his business, apologizing for letting them down, and promising that there
would be jobs for them all when things improved and the agency was able to
reopen. He was so distraught that it seemed to those collecting their final salaries
that they were in fact consoling him. All agreed he was a fine and delicate man,
worryingly so, for these were not times for such men.
At Nadia’s office the payroll department stopped giving out paychecks and
within days everyone stopped coming. There were no real goodbyes, or at least
none that she was part of, and since the security guards were the first to melt
away, a sort of calm looting, or payment-in-hardware, began, and people left
with what they could carry. Nadia hefted two laptop computers in their carrying
cases and her floor’s flat-screen TV, but in the end she did not take the TV
because it would have been difficult to load onto her motorcycle, and passed it
instead to a somber-faced colleague who thanked her politely.
• • •
ONE’S RELATIONSHIP to windows now changed in the city. A window was the
border through which death was possibly most likely to come. Windows could
not stop even the most flagging round of ammunition: any spot indoors with a
view of the outside was a spot potentially in the crossfire. Moreover the pane of
a window could itself become shrapnel so easily, shattered by a nearby blast, and
everyone had heard of someone or other who had bled out after being lacerated
by shards of flying glass.
Many windows were broken already, and the prudent thing would have been
to remove those that remained, but it was winter and the nights were cold, and
without gas and electricity, both of which were in increasingly short supply,
windows served to take some of the edge off the chill, and so people left them in
place.
Saeed and his family rearranged their furniture instead. They placed
bookshelves full of books flush against the windows in their bedrooms, blocking
the glass from sight but allowing light to creep in around the edges, and they
leaned Saeed’s bed over the tall windows in their sitting room, mattress and all,
upright, at an angle, so that the bed’s feet rested on the lintel. Saeed slept on
three rugs layered on the floor, which he told his parents suited his back.
Nadia taped the inside of her windows with beige packing tape, the sort
normally used to seal cardboard boxes, and hammered heavy-duty rubbish bags
into place over them, pounding nails into the window frames. When she had had
enough electricity to charge her backup battery, she would lounge around and
listen to her records in the light of a single bare bulb, the harsh sounds of the
fighting muffled somewhat by her music, and she would then glance at her
windows and think that they looked a bit like amorphous black works of
contemporary art.
The effect doors had on people altered as well. Rumors had begun to circulate
of doors that could take you elsewhere, often to places far away, well removed
from this death trap of a country. Some people claimed to know people who
knew people who had been through such doors. A normal door, they said, could
become a special door, and it could happen without warning, to any door at all.
Most people thought these rumors to be nonsense, the superstitions of the feebleminded. But most people began to gaze at their own doors a little differently
nonetheless.
Nadia and Saeed, too, discussed these rumors and dismissed them. But every
morning, when she woke, Nadia looked over at her front door, and at the doors
to her bathroom, her closet, her terrace. Every morning, in his room, Saeed did
much the same. All their doors remained simple doors, on/off switches in the
flow between two adjacent places, binarily either open or closed, but each of
their doors, regarded thus with a twinge of irrational possibility, became partially
animate as well, an object with a subtle power to mock, to mock the desires of
those who desired to go far away, whispering silently from its door frame that
such dreams were the dreams of fools.
• • •
WITHOUT WORK there was no impediment to Saeed and Nadia meeting during the
day except for the fighting, but that impediment was a serious one. The few
remaining local channels still on the air were saying that the war was going well
but the international ones were saying that it was going badly indeed, adding to
an unprecedented flow of migrants that was hitting the rich countries, who were
building walls and fences and strengthening their borders, but seemingly to
unsatisfactory effect. The militants had their own pirate radio station, featuring a
smooth-voiced announcer with a deep and unnervingly sexy voice, who spoke
slowly and deliberately, and claimed in a decelerated but almost rap-like cadence
that the fall of the city was imminent. Whatever the truth, being out and about
was risky, so Saeed and Nadia typically met at Nadia’s place.
Saeed had once more asked her to move in with him and his family, telling
her that he could explain things to his parents, and she could have his room, and
he would sleep in the sitting room, and they would not have to marry, they
would only, out of respect for his parents, have to remain chaste in the house,
and it would be safer for her, for this was no time for anyone to be alone. He had
not added that it was especially unsafe for a woman to be alone, but she knew
both that he thought it and that it was true, even as she parried his suggestion. He
could see that the matter unsettled her, so he did not say it again, but the offer
stood, and she considered it.
Nadia was herself coming to acknowledge that this was no longer a city
where the risks facing a young woman living independently could be thought of
as manageable, and equally importantly she worried for Saeed each time he
drove over to see her and back again. But part of her still resisted the idea of
moving in with him, with anyone for that matter, having at such great difficulty
moved out in the first place, and become quite attached to her small flat, to the
life, albeit often lonely, that she had built there, and also finding the idea of
living as a chaste half lover, half sister to Saeed in close proximity to his parents
rather bizarre, and she might have waited much longer had Saeed’s mother not
been killed, a stray heavy-caliber round passing through the windshield of her
family’s car and taking with it a quarter of Saeed’s mother’s head, not while she
was driving, for she had not driven in months, but while she was checking inside
for an earring she thought she had misplaced, and Nadia, seeing the state Saeed
and Saeed’s father were in when Nadia came to their apartment for the first time,
on the day of the funeral, stayed with them that night to offer what comfort and
help she could and did not spend another night in her own apartment again.
FIVE
FUNERALS WERE SMALLER and more rushed affairs in those days, because of the
fighting. Some families had no choice but to bury their dead in a courtyard or
at the sheltered margin of a road, it being impossible to reach a proper
graveyard, and so impromptu burial grounds grew up, one extinguished body
attracting others, in much the same way that the arrival of one squatter on a
disused patch of government land can give rise to an entire slum.
It was customary for a home that had suffered a bereavement to be filled with
relatives and well-wishers for many days, but this practice was presently
circumscribed by the dangers involved in making a journey in the city, and while
people did come to see Saeed’s father and Saeed, most came furtively, and could
not stay long. It was not the sort of occasion to ask what precisely Nadia’s
relationship was to the husband and son of the deceased, so no one did, but some
did inquire with their glances, and their eyes followed Nadia as she moved
around the apartment in her black robe, serving tea and biscuits and water, and
not praying, though not ostentatiously not praying, more as if she were busy
looking after people’s earthly needs and might do so later.
Saeed prayed a great deal, and so did his father, and so did their guests, and
some of them wept, but Saeed had wept only once, when he first saw his
mother’s corpse and screamed, and Saeed’s father wept only when he was alone
in his room, silently, without tears, his body seized as though by a stutter, or a
shiver, that would not let go, for his sense of loss was boundless, and his sense
of the benevolence of the universe was shaken, and his wife had been his best
friend.
Nadia called Saeed’s father “father” and he called her “daughter.” This began
when they first met, the terms seeming appropriate both to her and to him, and
being acceptable forms of address between the young and the old, even when not
related, and in any case Nadia had taken one look at Saeed’s father and felt him
like a father, for he was so gentle, and evoked in her a protective caring, as if for
one’s own child, or for a puppy, or for a beautiful memory one knows has
already commenced to fade.
• • •
NADIA SLEPT in what had been Saeed’s room, on a pile of carpets and blankets on
the floor, having refused Saeed’s father’s offer to give up his bed, and Saeed
slept on a similar though thinner pile in the sitting room, and Saeed’s father slept
by himself in his bedroom, a room where he had slept for most of his life but
where he could not recall the last instance he had slept alone and which for this
reason was no longer completely familiar to him.
Saeed’s father encountered each day objects that had belonged to his wife and
so would sweep his consciousness out of the current others referred to as the
present, a photograph or an earring or a particular shawl worn on a particular
occasion, and Nadia encountered each day objects that took her into Saeed’s
past, a book or a music collection or a sticker on the inside of a drawer, and
evoked emotions from her own childhood, and jagged musings on the fate of her
parents and her sister, and Saeed, for his part, was inhabiting a chamber that had
been his only briefly, years ago, when relatives from afar or abroad used to come
to visit, and being billeted here again conjured up for him echoes of a better era,
and so in these several ways these three people sharing this one apartment
splashed and intersected with each other across varied and multiple streams of
time.
Saeed’s neighborhood had fallen to the militants, and small-scale fighting had
diminished nearby, but large bombs still dropped from the sky and exploded
with an awesome power that brought to mind the might of nature itself. Saeed
was grateful for Nadia’s presence, for the way in which she altered the silences
that descended on the apartment, not necessarily filling them with words, but
making them less bleak in their muteness. And he was grateful too for her effect
on his father, whose politeness, when he recalled he was in the company of a
young woman, would jar him from what otherwise were interminable reveries
and would bring his attention back for a while to the here and now. Saeed
wished Nadia had been able to meet his mother, and his mother able to meet her.
Sometimes when Saeed’s father had gone to sleep Saeed and Nadia sat
together in the sitting room, their sides pressed close for connection and warmth,
perhaps holding hands, at most exchanging a kiss on the cheek as a farewell
before bed, and often they were silent, but often they spoke in low voices, about
how to escape from the city, or about the endless rumors of the doors, or about
nothings: the precise color of the refrigerator, the increasingly sorry state of
Saeed’s toothbrush, the loudness of Nadia’s snore when she had a cold.
One evening they were huddled together in this way, under a blanket, in the
flickering light of a paraffin lamp, for there was no grid electricity in their part of
the city anymore, and no piped gas or water, municipal services having entirely
broken down, and Saeed said, “It feels natural to have you here.”
“For me too,” Nadia replied, resting her head on his shoulder.
“The end of the world can be cozy at times.”
She laughed. “Yes. Like a cave.”
“You smell a bit like a caveman,” she added later.
“And you smell like a wood fire.”
She looked at him and felt her body tighten, but she resisted the urge to
caress.
When they heard that Nadia’s neighborhood had fallen to the militants as
well, and that the roads between the two were mostly clear, Saeed and Nadia
returned to her flat so she could collect some things. Nadia’s building had been
damaged, and parts of the wall that faced the street were gone. The backupbattery shop on the ground floor had been looted, but the metal door to the
stairway had not been forced, and the overall structure looked more or less sound
—in need of substantial repair, certainly, but not on the verge of collapse.
The plastic rubbish bags that covered Nadia’s windows were still in place,
except for one, which, along with the window itself, had been destroyed, and
where the window had formerly been a gash of blue sky was now visible,
unusually clear and lovely, except for a thin column of smoke rising somewhere
in the distance. Nadia took her record player and records and clothes and food,
and her parched but possibly revivable lemon tree, and also some money and
gold coins, which she had left hidden in the tree’s clay plot, buried within the
soil. These items she and Saeed loaded onto the backseat of his family’s car, the
top of the lemon tree sticking out of a lowered window. She did not remove the
money and coins from the pot in case they were searched at a militant
checkpoint on the way, which they were, but the fighters who stopped them
appeared exhausted and wired and accepted canned supplies as payment to pass.
When they reached home Saeed’s father saw the lemon tree and smiled for
what seemed like the first time in days. Together the three of them placed it on
their balcony, but quickly, because a band of armed men who looked like
foreigners had begun to gather on the street below, arguing in a language they
could not understand.
• • •
NADIA KEPT HER RECORD PLAYER and records out of sight in Saeed’s room, even
after the customary mourning period for Saeed’s mother was over, because
music was forbidden by the militants, and their apartment could be searched
without warning, indeed it had been once already, militants banging on the door
in the middle of the night, and in any case even if she had wanted to play a
record there was no electricity, not even enough to charge the apartment’s
backup batteries.
The night the militants came they were looking for people of a particular sect,
and demanded to see ID cards, to check what sort of names everyone had, but
fortunately for Saeed’s father and Saeed and Nadia their names were not
associated with the denomination being hunted. The neighbors upstairs were not
so lucky: the husband was held down while his throat was cut, the wife and
daughter were hauled out and away.
The dead neighbor bled through a crack in the floor, his blood appearing as a
stain in the high corner of Saeed’s sitting room, and Saeed and Nadia, who had
heard the family’s screams, went up to collect and bury him, as soon as they
dared, but his body was gone, presumably taken by his executioners, and his
blood was already fairly dry, a patch like a painted puddle in his apartment, an
uneven trail on the stairs.
The following night, or perhaps the night after that, Saeed entered Nadia’s
room and they were unchaste there for the first time. A combination of horror
and desire subsequently impelled him back each evening, despite his earlier
resolution that they do nothing that was disrespectful to his parents, and they
would touch and stroke and taste, always stopping short of sex, upon which she
no longer insisted, and which they had by now found ample means to
circumvent. His mother was no more, and his father seemed not to concern
himself with these romantic matters, and so they proceeded in secret, and the
fact that unmarried lovers such as they were now being made examples of and
punished by death created a semi-terrified urgency and edge to each coupling
that sometimes bordered on a strange sort of ecstasy.
• • •
AS THE MILITANTS secured the city, extinguishing the last large salients of
resistance, a partial calm descended, broken by the activities of drones and
aircraft that bombed from the heavens, these networked machines for the most
part invisible, and by the public and private executions that now took place
almost continuously, bodies hanging from streetlamps and billboards like a form
of festive seasonal decoration. The executions moved in waves, and once a
neighborhood had been purged it could then expect a measure of respite, until
someone committed an infraction of some kind, because infractions, although
often alleged with a degree of randomness, were invariably punished without
mercy.
Saeed’s father went each day to the home of a cousin who was like an elder
brother to Saeed’s father and his surviving siblings, and there he sat with the old
men and old women and drank tea and coffee and discussed the past, and they all
knew Saeed’s mother well and had stories to relate in which she featured
prominently, and while Saeed’s father was with them he felt not that his wife
was alive, for the magnitude of her death impressed itself upon him again with
every morning, but rather that he could share some small measure of her
company.
Saeed’s father tarried at her grave each evening on the way home. Once as he
stood there he saw some young boys playing football and this cheered him, and
reminded him of his own skill at the game when he was their age, but then he
realized that they were not young boys, but teenagers, young men, and they were
not playing with a ball but with the severed head of a goat, and he thought,
barbarians, but then it dawned upon him that this was the head not of a goat but
of a human being, with hair and a beard, and he wanted to believe he was
mistaken, that the light was failing and his eyes were playing tricks on him, and
that is what he told himself, as he tried not to look again, but something about
their expressions left him in little doubt of the truth.
Saeed and Nadia meanwhile had dedicated themselves single-mindedly to
finding a way out of the city, and as the overland routes were widely deemed too
perilous to attempt, this meant investigating the possibility of securing passage
through the doors, in which most people seemed now to believe, especially since
any attempt to use one or keep one secret had been proclaimed by the militants
to be punishable, as usual and somewhat unimaginatively, by death, and also
because those with shortwave radios claimed that even the most reputable
international broadcasters had acknowledged the doors existed, and indeed were
being discussed by world leaders as a major global crisis.
Following a tip from a friend, Saeed and Nadia headed out on foot at dusk.
They were dressed in accordance with the rules on dress and he was bearded in
accordance with the rules on beards and her hair was hidden in accordance with
the rules on hair, but they stayed in the margins of the roads, in the shadows as
much as possible, trying not to be seen while trying not to look like they were
trying not to be seen. They passed a body hanging in the air and could hardly
smell it until they were downwind, when the odor became almost unbearable.
Because of the flying robots high above in the darkening sky, unseen but
never far from people’s minds in those days, Saeed walked with a slight hunch,
as though cringing a tad at the thought of the bomb or missile one of them might
at any moment dispatch. By contrast, because she wanted not to appear guilty,
Nadia walked tall, so that if they were stopped and their ID cards were checked
and it was pointed out that her card did not list him as her husband, she would be
more believable when she led the questioners home and presented the forgery
that was supposedly their marriage certificate.
The man they were looking for called himself an agent, though it was unclear
if this was due to his specializing in travel or to his operating in secret or to some
other reason, and they were to meet him in the labyrinthine gloom of a burnt-out
shopping center, a ruin with innumerable exits and hiding places, which made
Saeed wish he had insisted Nadia not come and made Nadia wish they had
brought a torch or, failing that, a knife. They stood, barely able to see, and
waited with mounting unease.
They did not hear the agent approaching—or perhaps he had been there all
along—and they were startled by his voice just behind them. The agent spoke
softly, almost sweetly, his whisper bringing to mind that of a poet or a
psychopath. He instructed them to stand still, to not turn around. He told Nadia
to uncover her head, and when she asked why, he said it was not a request.
Nadia had the sense he was extremely close to her, as if he were about to
touch her neck, but she could not hear his breathing. There was a small sound in
the distance and she and Saeed realized the agent might not be alone. Saeed
asked where the door was and where it led to, and the agent replied that the
doors were everywhere but finding one the militants had not yet found, a door
not yet guarded, that was the trick, and might take a while. The agent demanded
their money and Saeed gave it to him, uncertain whether they were making a
down payment or being robbed.
As they hurried home, Saeed and Nadia looked at the night sky, at the
forcefulness of the stars and the moon’s pockmarked brightness in the absence of
electric lighting and in the reduced pollution from fuel-starved and hence sparse
traffic, and wondered where the door to which they had purchased access might
take them, someplace in the mountains or on the plains or by the seaside, and
they saw an emaciated man lying on the street who had recently expired, either
from hunger or illness, for he did not appear wounded, and in their apartment
they told Saeed’s father the potential good news but he was oddly silent in
response, and they waited for him to say something, and in the end all he said
was, “Let us hope.”
• • •
AS THE DAYS PASSED, and Saeed and Nadia did not hear from the agent again, and
increasingly questioned whether they would hear from the agent again,
elsewhere other families were on the move. One of these—a mother, father,
daughter, son—emerged from the complete blackness of an interior service door.
They were deep inside a vast pedestal floor, below a cluster of blond-and-glass
towers filled with luxury apartments and collectively named, by their developer,
Jumeirah Beach Residence. On a security camera the family could be seen
blinking in the sterile artificial light and recovering from their crossing. They
each had a slender build and upright posture and dark skin, and though the feed
lacked audio input it was of sufficient resolution that lip-reading software could
identify their language as Tamil.
After a brief interlude the family was picked up again by a second camera,
traversing a hallway and pushing the horizontal bars that secured a heavy set of
double fire-resistant doors, and as these doors opened the brightness of Dubai’s
desert sunlight overwhelmed the sensitivity of the image sensor and the four
figures seemed to become thinner, insubstantial, lost in an aura of whiteness, but
they were at that moment simultaneously captured on three exterior surveillance
feeds, tiny characters stumbling onto a broad sidewalk, a promenade, along a
one-way boulevard on which slowly cruised two expensive two-door
automobiles, one yellow, one red, the whining of their revving engines indirectly
visible in the way they startled the girl and boy.
The parents held their children’s hands and seemed to be at a loss as to which
direction to go. Perhaps they were from a coastal village themselves, and not
from a city, for they gravitated towards the sea and away from the buildings, and
they could be seen at multiple angles following a landscaped pathway through
the sand, the parents whispering to one another from time to time, the children
eyeing the mostly pale tourists lying on towels and loungers in a state of neartotal undress—but in numbers far fewer than normal for the winter high season,
though the children could not know this.
A small quadcopter drone was hovering fifty meters above them now, too
quiet to be heard, and relaying its feed to a central monitoring station and also to
two different security vehicles, one an unmarked sedan, the other a badged van
with grilles on its windows, and from the latter vehicle a pair of uniformed men
emerged and walked purposefully, but without undue or tourist-alarming haste,
along a trajectory that would intersect with that of the Tamil-speaking family in
a minute or so.
During this minute the family was also visible in the camera feeds of various
tourists’ selfie-taking mobile phones, and they seemed to be not so much a
cohesive unit but rather four disparate individuals, each behaving in a different
way, the mother repeatedly making eye contact with the women she passed and
then immediately glancing down, the father patting his pockets and the underside
of his backpack as though checking for tears or leaks, the daughter staring at
skydivers who were hurtling towards a nearby pier and pulling up at the last
moment and landing at a sprint, the son testing the rubberized jogger-friendly
surface beneath his feet with each step, and then the minute ended and they were
intercepted and led away, apparently bewildered, or overawed, for they held
hands and did not resist or scatter or run.
• • •
FOR THEIR PART, Saeed and Nadia enjoyed a degree of insulation from remote
surveillance when they were indoors, owing to their lack of electricity, but even
so their home could still be searched by armed men without warning, and of
course as soon as they stepped outside they could be seen by the lenses peering
down on their city from the sky and from space, and by the eyes of militants, and
of informers, who might be anyone, everyone.
One previously private function they now had to perform in public was the
emptying of their bowels, for without piped water the toilets in Saeed and
Nadia’s building no longer worked. Residents had dug two deep trenches in the
small courtyard in the back, one for men and one for women, separated by a
heavy sheet on a clothesline, and it was there that all had to squat to relieve
themselves, under the clouds, ignoring the stench, face to the ground so that even
if the act could be viewed, the identity of the actor might be kept somewhat to
oneself.
Nadia’s lemon tree did not recover, despite repeated watering, and it sat
lifeless on their balcony, clung to by a few desiccated leaves.
It might seem surprising that even in such circumstances Saeed’s and Nadia’s
attitudes towards finding a way out were not entirely straightforward. Saeed
desperately wanted to leave his city, in a sense he always had, but in his
imagination he had thought he would leave it only temporarily, intermittently,
never once and for all, and this looming potential departure was altogether
different, for he doubted he would come back, and the scattering of his extended
family and his circle of friends and acquaintances, forever, struck him as deeply
sad, as amounting to the loss of a home, no less, of his home.
Nadia was possibly even more feverishly keen to depart, and her nature was
such that the prospect of something new, of change, was at its most basic level
exciting to her. But she was haunted by worries too, revolving around
dependence, worries that in going abroad and leaving their country she and
Saeed and Saeed’s father might be at the mercy of strangers, subsistent on
handouts, caged in pens like vermin.
Nadia had long been, and would afterwards continue to be, more comfortable
with all varieties of movement in her life than was Saeed, in whom the impulse
of nostalgia was stronger, perhaps because his childhood had been more idyllic,
or perhaps because this was simply his temperament. Both of them, though,
whatever their misgivings, had no doubt that they would leave if given the
chance. And so neither expected, when a handwritten note from the agent
arrived, pushed under their apartment door one morning and telling them
precisely where to be at precisely what time the following afternoon, that
Saeed’s father would say, “You two must go, but I will not come.”
• • •
SAEED AND NADIA SAID this was impossible, and explained, in case of
misunderstanding, that there was no problem, that they had paid the agent for
three passages and would all be leaving together, and Saeed’s father heard them
out but would not be budged: they, he repeated, had to go, and he had to stay.
Saeed threatened to carry his father over his shoulder if he needed to, and he had
never spoken to his father in this way, and his father took him aside, for he could
see the pain he was causing his son, and when Saeed asked why his father was
doing this, what could possibly make him want to stay, Saeed’s father said,
“Your mother is here.”
Saeed said, “Mother is gone.”
His father said, “Not for me.”
And this was true in a way, Saeed’s mother was not gone for Saeed’s father,
not entirely, and it would have been difficult for Saeed’s father to leave the place
where he had spent a life with her, difficult not to be able to visit her grave each
day, and he did not wish to do this, he preferred to abide, in a sense, in the past,
for the past offered more to him.
But Saeed’s father was thinking also of the future, even though he did not say
this to Saeed, for he feared that if he said this to his son that his son might not
go, and he knew above all else that his son must go, and what he did not say was
that he had come to that point in a parent’s life when, if a flood arrives, one
knows one must let go of one’s child, contrary to all the instincts one had when
one was younger, because holding on can no longer offer the child protection, it
can only pull the child down, and threaten them with drowning, for the child is
now stronger than the parent, and the circumstances are such that the utmost of
strength is required, and the arc of a child’s life only appears for a while to
match the arc of a parent’s, in reality one sits atop the other, a hill atop a hill, a
curve atop a curve, and Saeed’s father’s arc now needed to curve lower, while
his son’s still curved higher, for with an old man hampering them these two
young people were simply less likely to survive.
Saeed’s father told his son he loved him and said that Saeed must not disobey
him in this, that he had not believed in commanding his son but in this moment
was doing so, that only death awaited Saeed and Nadia in this city, and that one
day when things were better Saeed would come back to him, and both men knew
as this was said that it would not happen, that Saeed would not be able to return
while his father still lived, and indeed as it transpired Saeed would not, after this
night that was just beginning, spend another night with his father again.
• • •
SAEED’S FATHER then summoned Nadia into his room and spoke to her without
Saeed and said that he was entrusting her with his son’s life, and she, whom he
called daughter, must, like a daughter, not fail him, whom she called father, and
she must see Saeed through to safety, and he hoped she would one day marry his
son and be called mother by his grandchildren, but this was up to them to decide,
and all he asked was that she remain by Saeed’s side until Saeed was out of
danger, and he asked her to promise this to him, and she said she would promise
only if Saeed’s father came with them, and he said again that he could not, but
that they must go, he said it softly, like a prayer, and she sat there with him in
silence and the minutes passed, and in the end she promised, and it was an easy
promise to make because she had at that time no thoughts of leaving Saeed, but
it was also a difficult one because in making it she felt she was abandoning the
old man, and even if he did have his siblings and his cousins, and might now go
live with them or have them come live with him, they could not protect him as
Saeed and Nadia could, and so by making the promise he demanded she make
she was in a sense killing him, but that is the way of things, for when we
migrate, we murder from our lives those we leave behind.
SIX
THEY SLEPT LITTLE that night, the night before their departure from the city, and
in the morning Saeed’s father embraced them and said goodbye and walked
off with moist eyes, but without faltering, the old man thinking it best he leave
the young people rather than make them agonize over stepping through the front
door with him watching from behind. He would not say where he was going for
the day, and so Saeed and Nadia found themselves alone, unable once he was
gone to chase him down, and in the quietness of his absence Nadia checked and
rechecked the smallish backpacks they would carry, smallish because they did
not want to arouse suspicion, but each full to bursting, like a turtle imprisoned in
too tight a shell, and Saeed ran his fingertips over the apartment’s furniture and
the telescope and the bottle containing the clipper ship, and he also carefully
folded a photograph of his parents to keep hidden inside his clothing, along with
a memory stick containing his family album, and twice he prayed.
The walk to the rendezvous point was an interminable one, and as they
walked Saeed and Nadia did not hold hands, for that was forbidden in public
between genders, even for an ostensibly married couple, but from time to time
their knuckles would brush at their sides, and this sporadic physical contact was
important to them. They knew there was a possibility the agent had sold them
out to the militants, and so they knew there was a possibility this was the final
afternoon of their lives.
The rendezvous point was in a converted house next to a market that
reminded Nadia of her former home. On the ground floor was a dentist’s clinic
long lacking medicines and painkillers, and as of yesterday lacking a dentist as
well, and in the dentist’s waiting room they had a shock because a man who
looked like a militant was standing there, assault rifle slung over his shoulder.
But he merely took the balance of their payment and told them to sit, and so they
sat in that crowded room with a frightened couple and their two school-age
children, and a young man in glasses, and an older woman who was perched
erectly on her seat as though she came from money, even though her clothes
were dirty, and every few minutes someone was summoned through to the
dentist’s office itself, and after Nadia and Saeed were summoned they saw a
slender man who also looked like a militant, and was picking at the edge of his
nostril with a fingernail, as though toying with a callus, or strumming a musical
instrument, and when he spoke they heard his peculiarly soft voice and knew at
once that he was the agent they had met before.
The room was gloomy and the dentist’s chair and tools resembled a torture
station. The agent gestured with his head to the blackness of a door that had once
led to a supply cabinet and said to Saeed, “You go first,” but Saeed, who had
until then thought he would go first, to make sure it was safe for Nadia to follow,
now changed his mind, thinking it possibly more dangerous for her to remain
behind while he went through, and said, “No, she will.”
The agent shrugged as though it was of no consequence to him, and Nadia,
who had not considered the order of their departure until that moment, and
realized there was no good option for either of them, that there were risks to
each, to going first and to going second, did not argue, but approached the door,
and drawing close she was struck by its darkness, its opacity, the way that it did
not reveal what was on the other side, and also did not reflect what was on this
side, and so felt equally like a beginning and an end, and she turned to Saeed and
found him staring at her, and his face was full of worry, and sorrow, and she
took his hands in hers and held them tight, and then, releasing them, and without
a word, she stepped through.
• • •
IT WAS SAID in those days that the passage was both like dying and like being
born, and indeed Nadia experienced a kind of extinguishing as she entered the
blackness and a gasping struggle as she fought to exit it, and she felt cold and
bruised and damp as she lay on the floor of the room at the other side, trembling
and too spent at first to stand, and she thought, while she strained to fill her
lungs, that this dampness must be her own sweat.
Saeed was emerging and Nadia crawled forward to give him space, and as
she did so she noticed the sinks and mirrors for the first time, the tiles of the
floor, the stalls behind her, all the doors of which save one were normal doors,
all but the one through which she had come, and through which Saeed was now
coming, which was black, and she understood that she was in the bathroom of
some public place, and she listened intently but it was silent, the only noises
emanating from her, from her breathing, and from Saeed, his quiet grunts like
those of a man exercising, or having sex.
They embraced without getting to their feet, and she cradled him, for he was
still weak, and when they were strong enough they rose, and she saw Saeed pivot
back to the door, as though he wished maybe to reverse course and return
through it, and she stood beside him without speaking, and he was motionless
for a while, but then he strode forward and they made their way outside and
found themselves between two low buildings, perceiving a sound like a shell
held to their ears and feeling a cold breeze on their faces and smelling brine in
the air and they looked and saw a stretch of sand and low gray waves coming in
and it seemed miraculous, although it was not a miracle, they were merely on a
beach.
The beach was fronted by a beach club, with bars and tables and large
outdoor loudspeakers and loungers stacked away for winter. Its signs were
written in English but also in other European tongues. It seemed deserted, and
Saeed and Nadia went and stood by the sea, the water stopping just short of their
feet and sinking into the sand, leaving lines in the smoothness like those of
expired soap bubbles blown by a parent for a child. After a while a pale-skinned
man with light brown hair came out and told them to move along, making
shooing gestures with his hands, but without any hostility or particular rudeness,
more as though he was conversing in an international pidgin dialect of sign
language.
They walked away from the beach club and in the lee of a hill they saw what
looked like a refugee camp, with hundreds of tents and lean-tos and people of
many colors and hues—many colors and hues but mostly falling within a band
of brown that ranged from dark chocolate to milky tea—and these people were
gathered around fires that burned inside upright oil drums and speaking in a
cacophony that was the languages of the world, what one might hear if one were
a communications satellite, or a spymaster tapping into a fiber-optic cable under
the sea.
In this group, everyone was foreign, and so, in a sense, no one was. Nadia
and Saeed quickly located a cluster of fellow countrywomen and -men and
learned that they were on the Greek island of Mykonos, a great draw for tourists
in the summer, and, it seemed, a great draw for migrants this winter, and that the
doors out, which is to say the doors to richer destinations, were heavily guarded,
but the doors in, the doors from poorer places, were mostly left unsecured,
perhaps in the hope that people would go back to where they came from—
although almost no one ever did—or perhaps because there were simply too
many doors from too many poorer places to guard them all.
The camp was in some ways like a trading post in an old-time gold rush, and
much was for sale or barter, from sweaters to mobile phones to antibiotics to,
quietly, sex and drugs, and there were families with an eye on the future and
gangs of young men with an eye on the vulnerable and upright folks and
swindlers and those who had risked their lives to save their children and those
who knew how to choke a man in the dark so he never made a sound. The island
was pretty safe, they were told, except when it was not, which made it like most
places. Decent people vastly outnumbered dangerous ones, but it was probably
best to be in the camp, near other people, after nightfall.
• • •
THE FIRST THINGS Saeed and Nadia bought, Nadia doing the negotiating, were
some water, food, a blanket, a larger backpack, a little tent that folded away into
a light, easily portable pouch, and electric power and local numbers for their
phones. They found a patch of land at the edge of the camp, partway up the hill,
that wasn’t too windy or too rocky, and set up their temporary home there, and
Nadia felt as she was doing it that she was playing house, as she had with her
sister as a child, and Saeed felt as he was doing it that he was a bad son, and
when Nadia squatted down beside a scraggly bush and bade him squat down as
well, and there concealed tried to kiss him under the open sky, he turned his face
away angrily, and then immediately apologized, and placed his cheek against
hers, and she tried to relax against him, cheek to bearded cheek, but she was
surprised, because what she thought she had glimpsed in him in that moment
was bitterness, and she had never seen bitterness in him before, not in all these
months, not for one second, even when his mother had died, then he had been
mournful, yes, depressed, but not bitter, not as though something was corroding
his insides. He had in fact always struck her as the opposite of bitter, so quick to
smile, and she was reassured when now he held her hand and kissed it, as if
making reparations, but she was a bit unsettled too, for it struck her that a bitter
Saeed would not be Saeed at all.
They took a nap in the tent, exhausted. When they woke Saeed tried to call
his father but an automated message informed him that his call could not be
completed, and Nadia tried to connect with people via chat applications and
social media, and an acquaintance who had made it to Auckland and another
who had reached Madrid replied right away.
Nadia and Saeed sat next to each other on the ground and caught up on the
news, the tumult in the world, the state of their country, the various routes and
destinations migrants were taking and recommending to each other, the tricks
one could gainfully employ, the dangers one needed at all costs to avoid.
In the late afternoon, Saeed went to the top of the hill, and Nadia went to the
top of the hill, and there they gazed out over the island, and out to sea, and he
stood beside where she stood, and she stood beside where he stood, and the wind
tugged and pushed at their hair, and they looked around at each other, but they
did not see each other, for she went up before him, and he went up after her, and
they were each at the crest of the hill only briefly, and at different times.
• • •
AS SAEED WAS COMING DOWN from the hill to where Nadia again sat by their tent,
a young woman was leaving the contemporary art gallery she worked at in
Vienna. Militants from Saeed and Nadia’s country had crossed over to Vienna
the previous week, and the city had witnessed massacres in the streets, the
militants shooting unarmed people and then disappearing, an afternoon of
carnage unlike anything Vienna had ever seen, well, unlike anything it had seen
since the fighting of the previous century, and of the centuries before that, which
were of an entirely different and greater magnitude, Vienna being no stranger, in
the annals of history, to war, and the militants had perhaps hoped to provoke a
reaction against migrants from their own part of the world, who had been
pouring into Vienna, and if that had been their hope then they had succeeded, for
the young woman had learned of a mob that was intending to attack the migrants
gathered near the zoo, everyone was talking and messaging about it, and she
planned to join a human cordon to separate the two sides, or rather to shield the
migrants from the anti-migrants, and she was wearing a peace badge on her
overcoat, and a rainbow pride badge, and a migrant compassion badge, the black
door within a red heart, and she could see as she waited to board her train that
the crowd at the station was not the normal crowd, children and older people
seemed absent and also there were far fewer women than usual, the coming riots
being common knowledge, and so it was likely that people were staying away,
but it wasn’t until she boarded the train and found herself surrounded by men
who looked like her brother and her cousins and her father and her uncles,
except that they were angry, they were furious, and they were staring at her and
at her badges with undisguised hostility, and the rancor of perceived betrayal,
and they started to shout at her, and push her, that she felt fear, a basic, animal
fear, terror, and thought that anything could happen, and then the next station
came and she shoved through and off the train, and she worried they might seize
her, and stop her, and hurt her, but they didn’t, and she made it off, and she stood
there after the train had departed, and she was trembling, and she thought for a
while, and then she gathered her courage, and she began to walk, and not in the
direction of her apartment, her lovely apartment with its view of the river, but in
the other direction, the direction of the zoo, where she had been intending to go
from the outset, and where she would still go, and all this happened as the sun
dipped lower in the sky, as it was doing above Mykonos as well, which though
south and east of Vienna, was after all in planetary terms not far away, and there
in Mykonos Saeed and Nadia were reading about the riot, which was starting in
Vienna, and which panicked people originally from their country were
discussing online how best to endure or flee.
• • •
BY NIGHT IT WAS COLD, and so Saeed and Nadia slept fully dressed, not removing
their jackets, and huddled together, wrapped inside their blanket, which was
above and around and also below them, providing a degree of cushioning against
the hard and somewhat uneven ground. Their tent was too small for them to
stand, a long but low pentahedron, in shape like the triangular glass prism Saeed
used to have as a child, with which he would refract sunlight into little rainbows.
He and Nadia held on to each other at first, cuddling, but cuddling grows
uncomfortable after a while, especially in tight quarters, and so eventually they
slept back-to-front, initially with him pressed against her from behind, and then,
at some later point as the moon passed unseen high overhead, he turned and she
turned and she pressed against him.
In the morning when he woke she was watching him and he stroked her hair
and she touched his bristles above his lip and below his ear with her finger and
he kissed her and things felt good between them. They packed up and Saeed
hefted the large backpack and Nadia the tent and they traded one of their
smallish backpacks for a yoga mat that they hoped would make sleeping more
comfortable.
Without warning people began to rush out of the camp and Saeed and Nadia
heard a rumor that a new door out had been found, a door to Germany, and so
they ran too, in the middle of the crowd initially, but striding swiftly so they
were soon closer to the front. The crowd filled the narrow road and overflowed
into the margins and stretched many hundreds of meters at its longest, and Saeed
wondered where they were going, and then up ahead he saw they were
approaching a hotel or resort of some kind. As they drew nearer he glimpsed a
line of men in uniform blocking their way, and he told Nadia, and they were
both frightened, and started to slow down, and allow people to pass them,
because they had seen in their city what happens when bullets are fired into an
unarmed mass of people. But in the end no bullets were fired, the uniformed men
simply stopped the crowd and stood their ground, and a few brave or desperate
or enterprising souls tried to make it through, running at high speed on either
side, where there were gaps, but these few were caught, and after an hour or so
the crowd dispersed and most people headed back to the camp.
Days passed like this, full of waiting and false hopes, days that might have
been days of boredom, and were for many, but Nadia had the idea that they
should explore the island as if they were tourists. Saeed laughed and agreed, and
this was the first time he had laughed since they arrived, and it warmed her to
see it, and so they carried their loads like trekkers in the wilderness and walked
along the beaches and up the hills and right to the edges of the cliffs, and they
decided that Mykonos was indeed a beautiful place, and they could understand
why people might come here. Sometimes they saw rough-looking groups of men
and Saeed and Nadia were careful to keep their distance, and by evening they
were always sure to sleep at the periphery of one of the big migrant camps, of
which there were many, and to which anyone might belong, joining or leaving as
they saw fit.
Once they met an acquaintance of Saeed’s and this seemed an almost
impossible and happy coincidence, like two leaves blown from the same tree by
a hurricane landing on top of each other far away, and it cheered Saeed greatly.
The man said that he was a people smuggler, and had helped people escape their
city, and was doing the same thing here, because he knew all the ins and outs.
He agreed to help Saeed and Nadia, and he cut his rate in half for them and they
were grateful, and he took their payment and said he would have them in
Sweden by the following morning, but when they woke there was no sign of
him. He was gone. He had disappeared overnight. Saeed trusted him and so they
stayed where they were for a week, stayed at the same spot in the same camp,
but they never saw him again. Nadia knew they had been swindled, such things
were common, and Saeed knew it too, but preferred for a while to try to believe
that something had happened to the man that had prevented him from returning,
and when he prayed Saeed prayed not only for the man’s return but also for his
safety, until it felt foolish to pray for this man any longer, and after that Saeed
prayed only for Nadia and for his father, especially for his father, who was not
with them, and should have been. But there was no way back to his father now,
because no door in their city went undiscovered by the militants for long, and no
one returning through a door who was known to have fled their rule was allowed
to live.
One morning Saeed was able to borrow a beard trimmer and trim his beard
down to the stubble he had had when Nadia first met him, and that morning he
asked Nadia why she still wore her black robes, since here she did not need to,
and she said that she had not needed to wear them even in their own city, when
she lived alone, before the militants came, but she chose to, because it sent a
signal, and she still wished to send this signal, and he smiled and asked, a signal
even to me, and she smiled as well and said, not to you, you have seen me with
nothing.
• • •
THEIR FUNDS WERE GROWING THINNER, more than half the money with which they
had left their city now gone. They better understood the desperation they saw in
the camps, the fear in people’s eyes that they would be trapped here forever, or
until hunger forced them back through one of the doors that led to undesirable
places, the doors that were left unguarded, what people in the camps referred to
as mousetraps, but which, in resignation, some people were nonetheless trying,
especially those who had exhausted their resources, venturing through them to
the same place from which they had come, or to another unknown place when
they thought anything would be better than where they had been.
Saeed and Nadia began to curtail their wanderings to conserve energy, and
thus reduce their need for food and drink. Saeed bought a simple fishing rod,
available for a less exorbitant price because its reel was broken and the line had
to be spooled out and pulled back in by hand. He and Nadia journeyed to the sea,
and stood on a rock, and put bread on the hook, and tried to fish, alone, two
people by themselves, all but surrounded by water the breeze was chopping into
opaque hillocks, concealing what lay beneath, and they fished and fished for
hours, taking turns, but neither of them knew how to fish, or maybe they were
just unlucky, and though they felt nibbles, they caught nothing, and it was as
though they were merely feeding their bread to the insatiable brine.
Someone had told them the best times to fish were at dawn and dusk, so they
stayed out alone longer than they otherwise might have. It was getting dark when
they saw four men in the distance, approaching along the beach. Nadia said they
should go, and Saeed agreed, and the couple walked away, quickly, but the men
seemed to follow, and Saeed and Nadia increased their pace, increased it as
much as they could manage, even though Nadia slipped and cut her arm on the
rocks. The men were gaining on them, and Saeed and Nadia began to wonder
aloud what of their things they could leave behind, to lighten the load, or as an
offering that might sate their pursuers. Saeed said perhaps the men wanted the
rod, and this seemed more reassuring to them than the alternative, which was to
consider what else the men might want. So they dropped the rod, but soon after
they rounded a bend and saw a house and outside the house were uniformed
guards, which meant the house contained a door to a desirable place, and Saeed
and Nadia had never before been relieved to see guards on the island, but they
were now. They came close, until the guards shouted at them to stay back, and
there Saeed and Nadia stopped, making it clear they would not try to rush the
house, sitting down where the guards could see them, and where they felt safe,
and Saeed considered whether to run back and retrieve the rod, but Nadia said it
was too risky. They both regretted dropping it now. They watched for a while
but the four men never appeared, and the two of them set up their tent right
there, but were unable to sleep much that night.
• • •
THE DAYS WERE GROWING WARMER, and spring was stuttering into being in
Mykonos, with buds and scattered flowers. In all the weeks they had been there
Saeed and Nadia had never been to the old town, for it was off-limits to migrants
at night, and they were strongly discouraged from going there even by day,
except to the outskirts, where they could trade with residents, which is to say
those who had been on the island longer than a few months, but the gash on
Nadia’s arm was beginning to fester, and so they had come to the outskirts of the
old town to get it tended to at a clinic. A partly shaved-haired local girl who was
not a doctor or a nurse but just a volunteer, a teenager with a kind disposition,
not more than eighteen or nineteen years of age, cleaned and dressed the wound,
gently, holding Nadia’s arm as though it was something precious, holding it
almost shyly. The two women got to talking, and there was a connection
between them, and the girl said she wanted to help Nadia and Saeed, and asked
them what they needed. They said above all they needed a way off the island,
and the girl said she might be able to do something, and they should stay nearby,
and she took Nadia’s number, and each day Nadia visited the clinic and she and
the girl spoke and sometimes had a coffee or a joint together and the girl seemed
so happy to see her.
The old town was exquisite, white blocks with blue windows scattered along
tawny hills, spilling down to the sea, and from the outskirts Saeed and Nadia
could spy little windmills and rounded churches and the vibrant green of trees
that from a distance looked like potted plants. It was expensive to stay nearby,
the camps there often having migrants with more money, and Saeed was
becoming worried.
But Nadia’s new friend was as good as her word, because very early one
morning she put both Nadia and Saeed on the back of her scooter and sped them
through still-quiet streets to a house on a hill with a courtyard. They dashed
inside and there was a door. The girl wished them good luck, and she hugged
Nadia tight, and Saeed was surprised to see what appeared to be tears in the
girl’s eyes, or if not tears then at least a misty shine, and Nadia hugged her too,
and this hug lasted a long time, and the girl whispered something to her,
whispered, and then she and Saeed turned and stepped through the door and left
Mykonos behind.
SEVEN
THEY EMERGED in a bedroom with a view of the night sky and furnishings so
expensive and well made that Saeed and Nadia thought they were in a hotel,
of the sort seen in films and thick, glossy magazines, with pale woods and cream
rugs and white walls and the gleam of metal here and there, metal as reflective as
a mirror, framing the upholstery of a sofa, the switch plate for the lights. They
lay still, hoping not to be discovered, but it was quiet, so quiet they imagined
they must be in the countryside—for they had no experience of acoustically
insulating glazing—and everyone in the hotel must be asleep.
As they stood, though, they saw from their full height what was below the
sky, namely that they were in a city, with a row of white buildings opposite, each
perfectly painted and maintained and implausibly like the next, and in front of
each of these buildings, rising from rectangular gaps in a pavement that was
paved with rectangular flagstones, or concrete laid in the manner of flagstones,
were trees, cherry trees, with buds and a few white blossoms, as though it had
snowed recently and the snow had caught in the boughs and leaves, all along the
street, in tree after tree after tree, and they stood and stared at this, for it seemed
almost unreal.
They waited for a while but knew they could not stay in this hotel room
forever, so eventually they tried the handle of the door, which was unlocked, and
emerged into a hallway, leading to a staircase, one flight down which led them to
an even grander staircase, off which were floors with more bedrooms but also
sitting rooms and salons, and only then did they realize that they were in a house
of some kind, surely a palace, with rooms upon rooms and marvels upon
marvels, and taps that gushed water that was like spring water and was white
with bubbles and felt soft, yes soft, to the touch.
• • •
DAWN WAS BREAKING in the city and still they had not been discovered and Saeed
and Nadia sat in the kitchen and pondered what to do. The refrigerator was
mostly empty, suggesting no one had eaten from it in some time, and while there
were boxes and cans of less perishable food in the cupboards, they did not want
to be accused of stealing, so they brought their own food out of their backpack
and boiled two potatoes for breakfast. They did however take two teabags from
the house, and make themselves tea, and each used a spoonful of the house’s
sugar as well, and if there had been milk in the house they might have helped
themselves to a tiny splash of that too, but there was no milk to be found.
They clicked on a television to see if they could discover where they were,
and it was soon clear to them that they were in London, and as they watched the
television with its intermittently apocalyptic news they felt oddly normal, for
they had not watched a television in months. Then they heard a sound from
behind them and saw a man was standing there, staring, and they got to their
feet, Saeed hefting their backpack and Nadia their tent, but the man turned
wordlessly and headed upstairs. They did not know what to make of this. The
man had seemed almost as surprised by his surroundings as they were, and they
saw no one else until nightfall.
When it was dark people began to emerge from the upstairs room where
Nadia and Saeed had themselves first arrived: a dozen Nigerians, later a few
Somalis, after them a family from the borderlands between Myanmar and
Thailand. More and more and more. Some left the house as soon as they could.
Others stayed, staking claim to a bedroom or a sitting room as their own.
Saeed and Nadia picked a small bedroom in the back, one floor up from the
ground, with a balcony from which they could jump to the rear garden, if
necessary, and from there with luck make an escape.
• • •
TO HAVE A ROOM to themselves—four walls, a window, a door with a lock—
seemed incredible good fortune, and Nadia was tempted to unpack, but she knew
they needed to be ready to leave at any moment, and so she took out of their
backpack only items that were absolutely required. For his part Saeed removed
the photo of his parents that he kept hidden in his clothing and placed it on a
bookshelf, where it stood, creased, gazing upon them and transforming this
narrow bedroom, at least partially, temporarily, into a home.
In the hall nearby was a bathroom, and Nadia wanted to take a shower more
than anything, more even than she wanted food. Saeed stood watch outside,
while she went in and stripped, and observed her own body, leaner than she had
ever seen it, and streaked with a grime mostly of her own biological creation,
dried sweat and dead skin, and with hair in places from which she had always
banished hair, and she thought her body looked like the body of an animal, a
savage. The water pressure in the shower was magnificent, striking her flesh
with real force, and scouring her clean. The heat was superb too, and she turned
it up as high as she could stand, the heat going all the way into her bones, chilled
from months of outdoor cold, and the bathroom filled up with steam like a forest
in the mountains, scented with pine and lavender from the soaps she had found, a
kind of heaven, with towels so plush and fine that when she at last emerged she
felt like a princess using them, or at least like the daughter of a dictator who was
willing to kill without mercy in order for his children to pamper themselves with
cotton such as this, to feel this exquisite sensation on their naked stomachs and
thighs, towels that felt as if they had never been used before and might never be
used again. Nadia began to put her folded clothes back on but all of a sudden
could not bear to, the stench from them was overpowering, and so she was about
to wash them in the tub when she heard a banging on the door and realized she
must have locked it. Opening up, she saw a nervous and annoyed and dirtylooking Saeed.
He said, “What the hell are you doing?”
She smiled and moved to kiss him, and while her lips did touch his, his did
not much respond.
“It’s been forever,” he said. “This isn’t our house.”
“I need five more minutes. I have to wash my clothes.”
He stared but did not disagree, and even if he had disagreed, she felt a steel in
herself which she knew meant she would have washed them anyway. What she
was doing, what she had just done, was for her not about frivolity, it was about
the essential, about being human, living as a human being, reminding oneself of
what one was, and so it mattered, and if necessary was worth a fight.
But the extraordinary satisfactions of the steamy bathroom seemed to have
evaporated as she shut the door, and the washing of her clothes, watching the
turbid water flow from them down the drain of the bathtub, was disappointingly
utilitarian. She tried to recover her former good mood, and not be angry with
Saeed, who she told herself was not wrong in his own way, just out of rhythm
with her in this moment, and when she emerged from the bathroom wrapped in
her towel, her towels, for she had one around her body and another around her
hair, and with her dripping but clean clothes in her hands, she was prepared to let
the little confrontation between them go.
But he said, looking at her, “You can’t stand here like that.”
“Don’t tell me what I can do.”
He looked stung by this comment, and also angry, and she was angry as well,
and after he had bathed, and washed his clothes, which he did perhaps as a
conciliatory gesture or perhaps because once he was cleansed of his own grime
he too realized something of what she had realized, they slept on the slender
single bed together without speaking, without touching, or without touching
more than the cramped space demanded, for this one night not unlike a couple
that was long and unhappily married, a couple that made out of opportunities for
joy, misery.
• • •
NADIA AND SAEED had crossed over on the morning of a Saturday and by
Monday morning when the housekeeper came to work the house was already
quite full, home perhaps to fifty squatters, from infants to the elderly, hailing
from as far west as Guatemala and as far east as Indonesia. The housekeeper
screamed as she unlocked the front door, and the police arrived quickly after,
two men in old-fashioned black hats, but they only looked in from outside, and
did not enter. Soon there was a vanload more of them, in full riot gear, and then
a car with two more who wore white shirts and black vests and were armed with
what appeared to be submachine guns, and on their black vests was the word
POLICE in white letters but these two looked to Saeed and Nadia like soldiers.
The residents of the house were terrified, most had seen firsthand what the
police and soldiers could do, and in their terror they spoke more to one another
than they otherwise might, strangers speaking to strangers. A sort of camaraderie
evolved, as it might not have had they been on the street, in the open, for then
they would likely have scattered, and the devil take the hindmost, but here they
were penned in together, and being penned in made them into a grouping, a
group.
When the police called over their bullhorns for everyone to exit the house,
most agreed among themselves that they would not do so, and so while a few
left, the vast majority stayed, Nadia and Saeed among them. The deadline for
their departure drew nearer, then nearer still, and then came and went, and they
were still there, and the police had not charged, and they felt they had won some
kind of a respite, and then something they could never have expected happened:
other people gathered on the street, other dark-and medium-and even lightskinned people, bedraggled, like the people of the camps on Mykonos, and these
people formed a crowd. They banged cooking pots with spoons and chanted in
various languages and soon the police decided to withdraw.
That night it was calm and quiet in the house, though there were sometimes
snatches of beautiful singing that could be heard, in Igbo, until quite late, and
Saeed and Nadia lay together and held hands on the soft bed in their little back
bedroom and were comforted by this, as if by a lullaby, comforted even though
they kept their bedroom door locked. In the morning they heard in the distance
someone making a call to prayer, at dawn, perhaps over a commandeered
karaoke machine, and Nadia was alarmed, waking from a dream and thinking for
a second that she was back home in their own city, with the militants, before
recalling where she really was, and then she watched, a bit surprised, as Saeed
got out of bed and prayed.
• • •
ALL OVER LONDON houses and parks and disused lots were being peopled in this
way, some said by a million migrants, some said by twice that. It seemed the
more empty a space in the city the more it attracted squatters, with unoccupied
mansions in the borough of Kensington and Chelsea particularly hard-hit, their
absentee owners often discovering the bad news too late to intervene, and
similarly the great expanses of Hyde Park and Kensington Gardens, filling up
with tents and rough shelters, such that it was now said that between
Westminster and Hammersmith legal residents were in a minority, and nativeborn ones vanishingly few, with local newspapers referring to the area as the
worst of the black holes in the fabric of the nation.
But even as people poured into London, some were venturing out of it as
well. An accountant in Kentish Town who had been on the verge of taking his
own life woke one morning to discover the blackness of a door where the bright
entrance to his small but well-lit second bedroom had been. While at first he had
armed himself with the hockey stick his daughter had left in his closet, left there
along with much else she had abandoned for her gap year, and subsequently he
had taken out his phone to call the authorities, he stopped himself to wonder why
he was bothering, and proceeded to put away the hockey stick and his phone,
and fill his tub as he had planned, and to place the box cutter he had purchased
on the little scalloped ledge next to the organic soap his ex-girlfriend would
never again use.
He reminded himself that he needed to cut lengthwise if he was serious, up
his forearm and not across it, and though he hated the idea of pain, and also of
being found naked, he thought this was the right way to go, well considered and
well planned. But the nearby blackness unsettled him, and reminded him of
something, of a feeling, of a feeling he associated with children’s books, with
books he had read as a child, or books that had been read to him rather, by his
mother, a woman with a gentle lisp and a gentle embrace, who had not died too
young but who had deteriorated too young, her illness taking with it her speech,
and her personality, and in the process taking his father too, making him into a
distant sort of man. And as the accountant thought this, he thought he might step
through the door, just once, to see what was on the other side, and so he did.
Later his daughter and his best friend would receive via their phones a photo
of him, on a seaside that seemed to have no trees, a desert seaside, or a seaside
that was in any case dry, with towering dunes, a seaside in Namibia, and a
message that said he would not be returning, but not to worry, he felt something,
he felt something for a change, and they might join him, he would be glad if they
did, and if they chose to, a door could be found in his flat. With that he was
gone, and his London was gone, and how long he remained in Namibia it was
hard for anyone who formerly knew him to say.
• • •
THE RESIDENTS OF THE HOUSE Nadia and Saeed now occupied wondered if they
had won. They savored being indoors, for many had spent many months without
a proper roof over their heads, but they knew deep down that a house like this, a
palace like this, would not be surrendered so easily, and their relief was therefore
fragile.
Nadia experienced the environment of the house as a bit like that of a
university dormitory at the start of classes, with complete strangers living in
close proximity, many of them on their best behavior, trying to add warmth to
conversations and strike poses of friendship, hoping these gestures would
become more natural over time. Outside the house much was random and
chaotic, but inside, perhaps, a degree of order could be built. Maybe even a
community. There were rough people in the house, but there were rough people
everywhere, and in life roughness had to be managed. Nadia thought it madness
to expect anything else.
For Saeed existence in the house was more jarring. On Mykonos he had
preferred the outskirts of the migrant camps, and he had grown accustomed to a
degree of independence from their fellow refugees. He was suspicious,
especially of the other men around, of whom there were many, and he found it
stressful to be packed in so tightly with people who spoke in tongues he did not
understand. Unlike Nadia, he felt in part guilty that they and their fellow
residents were occupying a home that was not their own, and guilty also at the
visible deterioration brought on by their presence, the presence of over fifty
inhabitants in a single dwelling.
He was the only one to object when people started to take for themselves
items of value in the house, a position that struck Nadia as absurd, and
physically dangerous for Saeed besides, and so she had told him not to be an
idiot, said it harshly, to protect him rather than to harm him, but he had been
shocked by her tone, and while he acquiesced, he wondered if this new way of
speaking to one another, this unkindness that was now creeping into their words
from time to time, was a sign of where they were headed.
Nadia too noticed a friction between them. She was uncertain what to do to
disarm the cycles of annoyance they seemed to be entering into with one
another, since once begun such cycles are difficult to break, in fact the opposite,
as if each makes the threshold for irritation next time a bit lower, as is the case
with certain allergies.
All the food in the house was very quickly consumed. Some residents had
money to buy more, but most had to spend their time foraging, which involved
going to the depots and stalls where various groups were giving out rations or
serving free soup and bread. The daily supplies at each of these were exhausted
within hours, sometimes within minutes, and the only option then was to barter
with one’s neighbors or kin or acquaintances, and since most people had little to
barter with, they usually bartered with a promise of something to eat tomorrow
or the next day in exchange for something to eat today, a bartering not so much
of different goods, exactly, but of time.
• • •
ONE DAY Saeed and Nadia were returning home with no food but modestly full
bellies, after a reasonably good evening of foraging, and she was experiencing
the peculiar sweet aftertaste and acidity of mustard and ketchup, and Saeed was
looking at his phone, when they heard shouting up ahead and saw people
running, and they realized that their street was under attack by a nativist mob,
Palace Gardens Terrace being roiled in a way that belied its name. The mob
looked to Nadia like a strange and violent tribe, intent on their destruction, some
armed with iron bars or knives, and she and Saeed turned and ran, but could not
escape.
Nadia’s eye was bruised and would soon swell shut and Saeed’s lip was split
and kept bleeding down his chin and onto his jacket, and in their terror they each
gripped with all their might a hand of the other to avoid being separated, but they
were merely knocked down, like many others, and on that evening of riots across
their part of London only three lives were lost, not many by the recent standards
of where they had come from.
In the morning they felt their bed was too tight for them both, raw as they
were from their injuries, and Nadia pushed Saeed away with her hip, trying to
make space, and Saeed pushed as well, trying to do the same, and for a second
she was angry, and then they turned face-to-face and he touched her swollenshut eye and she snorted and touched his swollen-up lip, and they looked at each
other and silently agreed to start their day without growling.
• • •
AFTER THE RIOTS the talk on the television was of a major operation, one city at a
time, starting in London, to reclaim Britain for Britain, and it was reported that
the army was being deployed, and the police as well, and those who had once
served in the army and the police, and volunteers who had received a weeklong
course of training. Saeed and Nadia heard it said that nativist extremists were
forming their own legions, with a wink and a nod from the authorities, and the
social media chatter was of a coming night of shattered glass, but all this would
probably take time to organize, and in that time Saeed and Nadia had to make a
decision: whether to stay or to go.
In their small bedroom after sunset they listened to music on Nadia’s phone,
using the phone’s built-in speaker. It would have been a simple matter to stream
this music from various websites, but they tried to economize in all things,
including the data bundles they had purchased for their phones, and so Nadia
downloaded pirated versions whenever she could find them, and they listened to
these. She was in any case glad to be rebuilding her music library: from past
experience, she did not trust in the continued availability of anything online.
One night she played an album that she knew Saeed liked, by a local band
popular in their city when they were in their teens, and he was surprised and
happy to hear it, because he was well aware she was not overly fond of their
country’s pop music, and so it was clear that she was playing this for him.
They sat cross-legged on their narrow bed, their backs propped up by the
wall. He extended a hand, palm up on his knee. She took it.
“Let’s agree to try harder not to speak shittily to each other,” she said.
He smiled. “Let’s promise.”
“I do.”
“I do, as well.”
That night he asked her what the life of her dreams would look like, whether
it would be in a metropolis or in the countryside, and she asked him whether he
could see them settling in London and not leaving, and they discussed how
houses such as the one they were occupying might be divided into proper
apartments, and also how they might start over someplace else, elsewhere in this
city, or in a city far away.
They felt closer on nights when they were making these plans, as though
major events distracted them from the more mundane realities of life, and
sometimes as they debated their options in their bedroom they would stop and
look at each other, as if remembering, each of them, who the other was.
Returning to where they had been born was unthinkable, and they knew that
in other desirable cities in other desirable countries similar scenes must be
unfolding, scenes of nativist backlash, and so even though they discussed
leaving London, they stayed. Rumors began to circulate of a tightening cordon
being put in place, a cordon moving through those of London’s boroughs with
fewer doors, and hence fewer new arrivals, sending those unable to prove their
legal residence to great holding camps that had been built in the city’s greenbelt,
and concentrating those who remained in pockets of shrinking size. Whether or
not this was true there was no denying that an ever more dense zone of migrants
was to be found in Kensington and Chelsea and in the adjacent parks, and
around this zone were soldiers and armored vehicles, and above it were drones
and helicopters, and inside it were Nadia and Saeed, who had run from war
already, and did not know where next to run, and so were waiting, waiting, like
so many others.
• • •
AND YET while all this occurred there were volunteers delivering food and
medicine to the area, and aid agencies at work, and the government had not
banned them from operating, as some of the governments the migrants were
fleeing from had, and in this there was hope. Saeed in particular was touched by
a native boy, just out of school, or perhaps in his final year, who came to their
house and administered polio drops, to the children but also to the adults, and
while many were suspicious of vaccinations, and many more, including Saeed
and Nadia, had already been vaccinated, there was such earnestness in the boy,
such empathy and good intent, that though some argued, none had the heart to
refuse him.
Saeed and Nadia knew what the buildup to conflict felt like, and so the
feeling that hung over London in those days was not new to them, and they faced
it not with bravery, exactly, and not with panic either, not mostly, but instead
with a resignation shot through with moments of tension, with tension ebbing
and flowing, and when the tension receded there was calm, the calm that is
called the calm before the storm, but is in reality the foundation of a human life,
waiting there for us between the steps of our march to our mortality, when we
are compelled to pause and not act but be.
The cherry trees exploded on Palace Gardens Terrace at that time, bursting
into white blossoms, the closest thing many of the street’s new residents had
ever seen to snow, and reminding others of ripe cotton in the fields, waiting to be
picked, waiting for labor, for the efforts of dark bodies from the villages, and in
these trees there were now dark bodies too, children who climbed and played
among the boughs, like little monkeys, not because to be dark is to be monkeylike, though that has been and was being and will long be slurred, but because
people are monkeys who have forgotten that they are monkeys, and so have lost
respect for what they are born of, for the natural world around them, but not, just
then, these children, who were thrilled in nature, playing imaginary games, lost
in the clouds of white like balloonists or pilots or phoenixes or dragons, and as
bloodshed loomed they made of these trees that were perhaps not intended to be
climbed the stuff of a thousand fantasies.
One night a fox appeared in the garden of the house where Saeed and Nadia
were staying. Saeed pointed it out to Nadia through the window of their little
back bedroom, and they were both amazed to see it, and wondered how such a
creature could survive in London, and where it had come from. When they asked
around if anyone else had seen a fox, all said no, and some people told them it
might have come through the doors, and others said it might have wandered in
from the countryside, and still others claimed foxes were known to live in this
part of London, and an old woman told them they had not seen a fox but rather
themselves, their love. They wondered if she meant the fox was a living symbol
or the fox was unreal and just a feeling and when others looked they would see
no fox at all.
Mention of their love had made Saeed and Nadia a bit uncomfortable, for
they had not been very romantic of late, each still perceiving the grating of their
presence on the other, and they put this down to being too long in too close
proximity, a state of unnatural nearness in which any relationship would suffer.
They began to wander separately during the day, and this separation came as a
relief to them, though Saeed worried what would happen if the fighting to clear
their area began so suddenly that they would not both be able to return home in
time, knowing from experience that a mobile phone could be a fickle connection,
its signal thought in normal circumstances to be like the sunlight or the
moonlight, but in actuality capable of an instant and endless eclipse, and Nadia
worried about the promise she had made Saeed’s father, whom she too had
called father, to stay with Saeed until he was safe, worried what it would make
her to be proven untrue to this promise, and whether that would mean she stood
for nothing whatsoever.
But liberated from claustrophobic closeness by day, exploring apart, they
converged with more warmth at night, even if sometimes this warmth felt like
that between relatives rather than between lovers. They began to sit on the
balcony outside their bedroom and wait in the dark for the fox to appear below,
in the garden. Such a noble animal, noble though it was fond of rummaging in
the trash.
As they sat they would on occasion hold hands, and on occasion kiss, and
once in a while feel the rekindling of an otherwise diminished fire and go to their
bed and torment each other’s bodies, never having sex, but never needing to, not
anymore, following a different ritual that still resulted in release. Then they
would sleep, or if not sleepy go back onto the balcony and wait for the fox, and
the fox was unpredictable, it might come and it might not, but often it did, and
when it did they were relieved, for it meant the fox had not disappeared and had
not been killed and had not found another part of town to make home. One night
the fox encountered a soiled diaper, pulled it out of the trash and sniffed at it, as
if wondering what it was, and then dragged it around the garden, fouling the
grass, changing course again and again, like a pet dog with a toy, or a bear with
an unfortunate hunter in its maw, in any case moving with both design and
unpredictable wildness, and when it was done the diaper lay in shreds.
That night the electricity went out, cut off by the authorities, and Kensington
and Chelsea descended into darkness. A sharp fear descended also, and the call
to prayer they had often heard in the distance from the park was silenced. They
supposed the karaoke player that might have been used for that task was unable
to run on batteries.
EIGHT
THE COMPLEXITIES of London’s electricity network were such that a few motes
of nighttime brightness remained in Saeed and Nadia’s locality, at properties
on the edges, near where barricades and checkpoints were manned by armed
government forces, and in scattered pockets that were for some reason difficult
to disconnect, and in the odd building here and there where an enterprising
migrant had rigged together a connection to a still-active high-voltage line,
risking and in some cases succumbing to electrocution. Overwhelmingly,
though, around Saeed and Nadia it was dark.
Mykonos had not been well lit, but electricity had reached everywhere there
were wires. In their own fled city, when the electricity had gone, it had gone for
all. But in London there were parts as bright as ever, brighter than anyplace
Saeed or Nadia had seen before, glowing up into the sky and reflecting down
again from the clouds, and in contrast the city’s dark swaths seemed darker,
more significant, the way that blackness in the ocean suggests not less light from
above, but a sudden drop-off in the depths below.
From dark London, Saeed and Nadia wondered what life must be like in light
London, where they imagined people dined in elegant restaurants and rode in
shiny black cabs, or at least went to work in offices and shops and were free to
journey about as they pleased. In dark London, rubbish accrued, uncollected, and
underground stations were sealed. The trains kept running, skipping stops near
Saeed and Nadia but felt as a rumble beneath their feet and heard at a low,
powerful frequency, almost subsonic, like thunder or the detonation of a
massive, distant bomb.
At night, in the darkness, as drones and helicopters and surveillance balloons
prowled intermittently overhead, fights would sometimes break out, and there
were murders and rapes and assaults as well. Some in dark London blamed these
incidents on nativist provocateurs. Others blamed other migrants, and began to
move, in the manner of cards dealt from a shuffled deck during the course of a
game, reassembling themselves in suits and runs of their own kind, like with
like, or rather superficially like with superficially like, all the hearts together, all
the clubs together, all the Sudanese, all the Hondurans.
Saeed and Nadia did not move, but their house began to change nonetheless.
Nigerians were initially the largest among many groups of residents, but every
so often a non-Nigerian family would relocate out of the house, and their place
would almost always be taken by more Nigerians, and so the house began to be
known as a Nigerian house, like the two on either side. The elder Nigerians of
these three houses would meet in the garden of the property to the right of Saeed
and Nadia’s, and this meeting they called the council. Women and men both
attended, but the only obvious non-Nigerian who attended was Nadia.
The first time Nadia went the others seemed surprised to see her, not merely
because of her ethnicity but because of her relatively young age. Momentarily
there was a silence, but then an old woman with a turban who lived with her
daughter and grandsons in the bedroom above Saeed and Nadia’s, and whom
Nadia had helped on more than one occasion to ascend the stairs, the old woman
being regal in posture but also quite large, this old woman motioned to Nadia,
beckoned Nadia to come stand at her side, to stand beside the garden chair on
which she was sitting. This seemed to settle the matter, and Nadia was not
questioned or asked to leave.
Initially Nadia did not follow much of what was being said, just snippets here
and there, but over time she understood more and more, and she understood also
that the Nigerians were in fact not all Nigerians, some were half Nigerians, or
from places that bordered Nigeria, from families that spanned both sides of a
border, and further that there was perhaps no such thing as a Nigerian, or
certainly no one common thing, for different Nigerians spoke different tongues
among themselves, and belonged to different religions. Together in this group
they conversed in a language that was built in large part from English, but not
solely from English, and some of them were in any case more familiar with
English than were others. Also they spoke different variations of English,
different Englishes, and so when Nadia gave voice to an idea or opinion among
them, she did not need to fear that her views could not be comprehended, for her
English was like theirs, one among many.
The activities of the council were mundane, making decisions on room
disputes or claims of theft or unneighborly behavior, and also on relations with
other houses on the street. Deliberations were often slow and cumbersome, so
these gatherings were not particularly thrilling. And yet Nadia looked forward to
them. They represented something new in her mind, the birth of something new,
and she found these people who were both like and unlike those she had known
in her city, familiar and unfamiliar, she found them interesting, and she found
their seeming acceptance of her, or at least tolerance of her, rewarding, an
achievement in a way.
Among the younger Nigerians Nadia acquired a bit of a special status,
perhaps because they saw her with their elders, or perhaps because of her black
robe, and so the younger Nigerian men and women and the older Nigerian boys
and girls, the ones who often had quick jibes to make about many of the others
in the house, rarely said anything of that nature to her, or about her, at least in
her presence. She came and went unruffled through the crowded rooms and
passages, unruffled except by a fast-talking Nigerian woman her own age, a
woman with a leather jacket and a chipped tooth, who stood like a gunslinger,
with hips open and belt loose and hands at her sides, and spared no one from her
verbal lashings, from her comments that would follow you even as you passed
her and left her behind.
Saeed, though, was less comfortable. As he was a young man the other young
men would size him up from time to time, as young men do, and Saeed found
this disconcerting. Not because he had not encountered anything similar in his
own country, he had, but because here in this house he was the only man from
his country, and those sizing him up were from another country, and there were
far more of them, and he was alone. This touched upon something basic,
something tribal, and evoked tension and a sort of suppressed fear. He was
uncertain when he could relax, if he could relax, and so when he was outside his
bedroom but inside the house he seldom felt fully at ease.
Once, he was alone, arriving home while Nadia was at a meeting of the
council, and the woman in the leather jacket stood in the hall, blocking his way
with her narrow, jagged form, her back leaning against one wall, a foot planted
on the other. Saeed did not like to admit it but he was intimidated by her, by her
intensity and by the speed and unpredictability of her words, words that he often
could not understand, but words that made others laugh. He stood there and
waited for her to move, to yield space for him to pass. But she did not move, and
so he said excuse me, and she said why should I excuse you, she said more than
that, but all he could catch was that phrase. Saeed was angry that she was toying
with him, and alarmed also, and he considered turning around and coming back
later. But he realized at that moment that there was a man behind him, a toughlooking Nigerian man. Saeed had heard that this man had a gun, though he could
not see it on him, but many of the migrants in dark London had taken to carrying
knives and other weapons, being as they were in a state of siege, and liable to be
attacked by government forces at any time, or in some cases being predisposed
to carrying weapons, having done it where they came from, and so continuing to
do it here, which Saeed suspected was the case with this man.
Saeed wanted to run but had nowhere to run to, and tried to hide his panic,
but then the woman in the leather jacket removed her foot from the wall, and
there was space for Saeed to pass, and so he squeezed through, brushing her
body with his, and feeling emasculated as he did so, and when he was alone in
his and Nadia’s room he sat on the bed and his heart was racing and he wanted
to shout and to huddle in a corner but of course he did neither.
• • •
AROUND A BEND, on Vicarage Gate, was a house known to be a house of people
from his country. Saeed began to spend more time there, drawn by the familiar
languages and accents and the familiar smell of the cooking. One afternoon he
was there at prayer time, and he joined his fellow countrymen in prayer in the
back garden, under a blue sky that seemed shockingly blue, like the sky of
another world, absent the airborne dust of the city where he had spent his entire
life, and also peering out into space from a higher latitude, a different perch on
the spinning Earth, nearer its pole than its equator, and so glimpsing the void
from a different angle, a bluer angle, and as he prayed he felt praying was
different here, somehow, in the garden of this house, with these men. It made
him feel part of something, not just something spiritual, but something human,
part of this group, and for a wrenchingly painful second he thought of his father,
and then a bearded man with two white marks in the black on either side of his
chin, marks like those of a great cat or wolf, put his arm around Saeed and said
brother would you like some tea.
That day Saeed felt he was really accepted by this house, and he thought he
could ask the man with the white-marked beard if there was space there for him
and Nadia, whom he called his wife. The man said there was always space for a
brother and sister, though sadly not a room they could share, but Saeed could
stay with him and some other men on the floor of the living room, provided that
is he did not mind sleeping on the floor, and Nadia could stay upstairs with the
women, unfortunately even he and his own wife were split up in this manner,
and they were among the first residents, but it was the only civilized way to cram
as many people into the house as they had managed to do, as was righteous to
do.
When Saeed told Nadia this good news she did not act like it was good news
at all.
“Why would we want to move?” she said.
“To be among our own kind,” Saeed answered.
“What makes them our kind?”
“They’re from our country.”
“From the country we used to be from.”
“Yes.” Saeed tried not to sound annoyed.
“We’ve left that place.”
“That doesn’t mean we have no connection.”
“They’re not like me.”
“You haven’t met them.”
“I don’t need to.” She released a long, taut breath. “Here we have our own
room,” she said, softening her tone. “Just the two of us. It’s a big luxury. Why
would we give that up to sleep apart? Among dozens of strangers?”
Saeed had no answer for this. Considering it later, he thought it was indeed
odd that he would want to give up their bedroom for a pair of separated spaces,
with a barrier between them, as when they lived in his parents’ home, a time he
now thought of fondly in a way, despite the horrors, fondly in terms of how he
had felt for Nadia and she had felt for him, how they had felt together. He did
not press the point, but when Nadia brought her face close to his in bed that
night, close enough to tickle his lips with her breathing, he was unable to muster
the enthusiasm to bridge the tiny distance it would have taken to kiss.
• • •
EVERY DAY A FLIGHT of fighter aircraft would streak through the sky, screaming a
reminder to the people of dark London of the technological superiority of their
opponents, of the government and nativist forces. At the borders of their locality
Saeed and Nadia could occasionally glimpse tanks and armored vehicles and
communication arrays and robots that walked or crawled like animals, bearing
loads for soldiers or rehearsing the disarming of explosives or perhaps preparing
to do some other unknown task. Even more than the fighter planes and the tanks
these robots, few though they were, and the drones overhead, were frightening,
because they suggested an unstoppable efficiency, an inhuman power, and
evoked the kind of dread that a small mammal feels before a predator of an
altogether different order, like a rodent before a snake.
In meetings of the council Nadia listened as the elders discussed what to do
when the operation finally came. All agreed that the most important thing was to
manage the impetuousness of the youngsters, for armed resistance would likely
lead to a slaughter, and nonviolence was surely their most potent response,
shaming their attackers into civility. All agreed on this except Nadia, who was
unsure what she thought, who had seen what happens to people who surrender,
as her former city surrendered to the militants, and who thought that the young
people with their guns and their knives and their fists and their teeth were
entitled to use these things, and that the ferocity of the little was sometimes all
that kept them safe from the predations of the big. But there was wisdom in what
the elders said too, and so she was unsure.
Saeed also was unsure. But in the nearby house of his fellow countryfolk the
man with the white-marked beard spoke of martyrdom, not as the most desirable
outcome but as one possible end of a path the right-minded had no other choice
but to follow, and advocated a banding together of migrants along religious
principles, cutting across divisions of race or language or nation, for what did
those divisions matter now in a world full of doors, the only divisions that
mattered now were between those who sought the right of passage and those
who would deny them passage, and in such a world the religion of the righteous
must defend those who sought passage. Saeed was torn because he was moved
by these words, strengthened by them, and they were not the barbarous words of
the militants back home, the militants because of whom his mother was dead,
and possibly by now his father as well, but at the same time the gathering of men
drawn to the words of the man with the white-marked beard sporadically did
remind him of the militants, and when he thought this he felt something rancid in
himself, like he was rotting from within.
There were guns in the house of his fellow countryfolk, more arriving each
day through the doors. Saeed accepted a pistol but not a rifle, since he could
conceal it, and in his heart he would not have been able to say if he took the
pistol because it would make him safer from the nativists or from the Nigerians,
his own neighbors. As he undressed that night he did not speak of it, but also he
did not hide it from Nadia, and upon seeing the pistol he thought she would fight
with him, or at least argue, for he knew what the council had decided. But she
did not do so.
Instead she watched him, and he looked at her, and he saw her animal form,
the strangeness of her face and her body, and she saw the strangeness of his, and
when he reached for her she came to him, came to him though she moved
slightly away, and there was a mutual violence and excitement to their coupling,
a kind of shocked, almost painful surprise.
Only after Nadia had fallen asleep and Saeed lay there in the moonlight that
crept between and around the blinds did he consider that he had no idea how to
use or maintain a pistol, not the faintest clue, beyond the fact that pulling the
trigger should make it fire. He realized he was being ridiculous, and must return
it the very next day.
• • •
A THRIVING TRADE in electricity was under way in dark London, run by those
who lived in pockets with power, and Saeed and Nadia were able to recharge
their phones from time to time, and if they walked at the edges of their locality
they could pick up a strong signal, and so like many others they caught up with
the world in this way, and once as Nadia sat on the steps of a building reading
the news on her phone across the street from a detachment of troops and a tank
she thought she saw online a photograph of herself sitting on the steps of a
building reading the news on her phone across the street from a detachment of
troops and a tank, and she was startled, and wondered how this could be, how
she could both read this news and be this news, and how the newspaper could
have published this image of her instantaneously, and she looked about for a
photographer, and she had the bizarre feeling of time bending all around her, as
though she was from the past reading about the future, or from the future reading
about the past, and she almost felt that if she got up and walked home at this
moment there would be two Nadias, that she would split into two Nadias, and
one would stay on the steps reading and one would walk home, and two different
lives would unfold for these two different selves, and she thought she was losing
her balance, or possibly her mind, and then she zoomed in on the image and saw
that the woman in the black robe reading the news on her phone was actually not
her at all.
The news in those days was full of war and migrants and nativists, and it was
full of fracturing too, of regions pulling away from nations, and cities pulling
away from hinterlands, and it seemed that as everyone was coming together
everyone was also moving apart. Without borders nations appeared to be
becoming somewhat illusory, and people were questioning what role they had to
play. Many were arguing that smaller units made more sense, but others argued
that smaller units could not defend themselves.
Reading the news at that time one was tempted to conclude that the nation
was like a person with multiple personalities, some insisting on union and some
on disintegration, and that this person with multiple personalities was
furthermore a person whose skin appeared to be dissolving as they swam in a
soup full of other people whose skins were likewise dissolving. Even Britain was
not immune from this phenomenon, in fact some said Britain had already split,
like a man whose head had been chopped off and yet still stood, and others said
Britain was an island, and islands endure, even if the people who come to them
change, and so it had been for millennia, and so it would be for millennia more.
The fury of those nativists advocating wholesale slaughter was what struck
Nadia most, and it struck her because it seemed so familiar, so much like the
fury of the militants in her own city. She wondered whether she and Saeed had
done anything by moving, whether the faces and buildings had changed but the
basic reality of their predicament had not.
But then around her she saw all these people of all these different colors in all
these different attires and she was relieved, better here than there she thought,
and it occurred to her that she had been stifled in the place of her birth for
virtually her entire life, that its time for her had passed, and a new time was here,
and, fraught or not, she relished this like the wind in her face on a hot day when
she rode her motorcycle and lifted the visor of her helmet and embraced the dust
and the pollution and the little bugs that sometimes went into your mouth and
made you recoil and even spit, but after spitting grin, and grin with a wildness.
• • •
FOR OTHERS TOO the doors came as a release. In the hills above Tijuana was an
orphanage called simply the House of the Children, perhaps because it was not
precisely an orphanage. Or not only an orphanage, though that is what it was
referred to by the college students from across the border who would sometimes
come here to do volunteer work: painting, carpentry, the hanging and spackling
of drywall. But many of the children in the House of the Children had at least
one living parent or sibling or uncle or aunt. Usually these relatives labored on
the other side, in the United States, and their absences would last until the child
was old enough to attempt the crossing, or until the relative was exhausted
enough to return, or on occasion, quite often, forever, because life and its end are
unpredictable, especially at a distance, where death seems to operate with such
whimsical aim.
The House sat on a ridge at the crest of a hill, fronting a street. Its chain-linkfenced and partly concrete-floored play area was at the back, facing a parched
valley, on which the other low dwellings of that street also opened, some of them
rising on stilts, as though jutting out to sea, an effect that was incongruous, given
the dryness and lack of water all about. But the Pacific Ocean was only a couple
hours’ walk to the west, and besides, stilts made sense given the terrain.
Out of a black door in a nearby cantina, admittedly an atypical place for a
young woman like herself to be found, a young woman was emerging. The
owner made no fuss over it, for the times were such, and once this young woman
had emerged she rose and strode to the orphanage. There she located another
young woman, or rather a grown girl, and the young woman hugged the girl,
whom she recognized only because she had seen her on electronic displays, on
the screens of phones and computers, it having been that many years, and the girl
hugged her mother and then became shy.
The girl’s mother met the adults who ran the orphanage, and many of the
children, who stared at her and chattered as though she was a sign of something,
which of course she was, since if she had come then others would come too.
Dinner that evening was rice and refried beans served on paper plates, eaten on
an unbroken row of tables flanked by benches, and the mother sat at the center,
like a dignitary or a holy figure, and told stories that some of the children, being
children, imagined happening to their own mothers, now, or before, when their
mothers were still alive.
The mother who had returned on this day spent the night at the orphanage so
her daughter could say her farewells. And then mother and daughter walked
together to the cantina, and the owner allowed them in, shaking his head but
smiling as well, the smile bending his mustache, and making his fierce visage
somewhat goofy for a moment, and with that the mother and her daughter were
gone.
• • •
IN LONDON, Saeed and Nadia heard that military and paramilitary formations had
fully mobilized and deployed in the city from all over the country. They
imagined British regiments with ancient names and modern kit standing ready to
cut through any resistance that might be encountered. A great massacre, it
seemed, was in the offing. Both of them knew that the battle of London would
be hopelessly one-sided, and like many others they no longer ventured far from
their home.
The operation to clear the migrant ghetto in which Saeed and Nadia found
themselves began badly, with a police officer shot in the leg within seconds as
his unit moved into an occupied cinema near Marble Arch, and then the flat
sounds of a firefight commenced, coming from there but also from elsewhere,
growing and growing, all around, and Saeed, who was caught in the open, ran
back to the house, and found the heavy front door locked shut, and he banged on
it until it opened, Nadia yanking him in and slamming it behind him.
They went to their room in the back and pushed their mattress up against the
window and sat together in one corner and waited. They heard helicopters and
more shooting and announcements to peacefully vacate the area made over
speakers so powerful that they shook the floor, and they saw through the gap
between mattress and window thousands of leaflets dropping from the sky, and
after a while they saw smoke and smelled burning, and then it was quiet, but the
smoke and the smell lasted a long time, particularly the smell, lingering even
when the wind direction changed.
That night a rumor spread that over two hundred migrants had been
incinerated when the cinema burned down, children and women and men, but
especially children, so many children, and whether or not this was true, or any of
the other rumors, of a bloodbath in Hyde Park, or in Earl’s Court, or near the
Shepherd’s Bush roundabout, migrants dying in their scores, whatever it was
that had happened, something seemed to have happened, for there was a pause,
and the soldiers and police officers and volunteers who had advanced into the
outer edges of the ghetto pulled back, and there was no more shooting that night.
The next day was quiet, and the day after that, and on the second day of quiet
Saeed and Nadia removed the mattress from their window and dared to venture
outside and forage for food but there was none to be found. The depots and soup
kitchens were shut. Some supplies were coming through the doors, but not
nearly enough. The council met and requisitioned all provisions in the three
houses, and these were rationed, with most going to the children, and Saeed and
Nadia getting a handful of almonds each one day, and a tin of herring to share
the next.
• • •
THEY SAT ON THEIR BED and watched the rain and talked as they often did about
the end of the world, and Saeed wondered aloud once again if the natives would
really kill them, and Nadia said once again that the natives were so frightened
that they could do anything.
“I can understand it,” she said. “Imagine if you lived here. And millions of
people from all over the world suddenly arrived.”
“Millions arrived in our country,” Saeed replied. “When there were wars
nearby.”
“That was different. Our country was poor. We didn’t feel we had as much to
lose.”
Outside on the balcony the rain clattered in pots and pans, and periodically
Saeed or Nadia would get up and open the window and carry two of these to the
bathroom and empty them into the stoppered tub, which the council had
designated part of the house’s emergency water supply, now that the taps had
run dry.
Nadia watched Saeed and not for the first time wondered if she had led him
astray. She thought maybe he had in the end been wavering about leaving their
city, and she thought maybe she could have tipped him either way, and she
thought he was basically a good and decent man, and she was filled with
compassion for him in that instant, as she observed his face with its gaze upon
the rain, and she realized she had not in her life felt so strongly for anyone in the
world as she had for Saeed in the moments of those first months when she had
felt most strongly for him.
Saeed for his part wished he could do something for Nadia, could protect her
from what would come, even if he understood, at some level, that to love is to
enter into the inevitability of one day not being able to protect what is most
valuable to you. He thought she deserved better than this, but he could see no
way out, for they had decided not to run, not to play roulette with yet another
departure. To flee forever is beyond the capacity of most: at some point even a
hunted animal will stop, exhausted, and await its fate, if only for a while.
“What do you think happens when you die?” Nadia asked him.
“You mean the afterlife?”
“No, not after. When. In the moment. Do things just go black, like a phone
screen turning off? Or do you slip into something strange in the middle, like
when you’re falling asleep, and you’re both here and there?”
Saeed thought that it depended on how you died. But he saw Nadia seeing
him, so intent on his answer, and he said, “I think it would be like falling asleep.
You’d dream before you were gone.”
It was all the protection he could offer her then. And she smiled at this, a
warm, bright smile, and he wondered if she believed him or if she thought, no,
dearest, that is not what you think at all.
• • •
BUT A WEEK PASSED. And then another. And then the natives and their forces
stepped back from the brink.
Perhaps they had decided they did not have it in them to do what would have
needed to be done, to corral and bloody and where necessary slaughter the
migrants, and had determined that some other way would have to be found.
Perhaps they had grasped that the doors could not be closed, and new doors
would continue to open, and they had understood that the denial of coexistence
would have required one party to cease to exist, and the extinguishing party too
would have been transformed in the process, and too many native parents would
not after have been able to look their children in the eye, to speak with head held
high of what their generation had done. Or perhaps the sheer number of places
where there were now doors had made it useless to fight in any one.
And so, irrespective of the reason, decency on this occasion won out, and
bravery, for courage is demanded not to attack when afraid, and the electricity
and water came on again, and negotiations ensued, and word spread, and among
the cherry trees on Palace Gardens Terrace Saeed and Nadia and their neighbors
celebrated, they celebrated long into the night.
NINE
THAT SUMMER it seemed to Saeed and Nadia that the whole planet was on the
move, much of the global south headed to the global north, but also
southerners moving to other southern places and northerners moving to other
northern places. In the formerly protected greenbelt around London a ring of
new cities was being built, cities that would be able to accommodate more
people again than London itself. This development was called the London Halo,
one of innumerable human halos and satellites and constellations springing up in
the country and in the world.
It was here that Saeed and Nadia found themselves in those warmer months,
in one of the worker camps, laboring away. In exchange for their labor in
clearing terrain and building infrastructure and assembling dwellings from
prefabricated blocks, migrants were promised forty meters and a pipe: a home on
forty square meters of land and a connection to all the utilities of modernity.
A mutually agreed time tax had been enacted, such that a portion of the
income and toil of those who had recently arrived on the island would go to
those who had been there for decades, and this time tax was tapered in both
directions, becoming a smaller and smaller sliver as one continued to reside, and
then a larger and larger subsidy thereafter. Disruptions were enormous, and
conflict did not vanish overnight, it persisted and simmered, but reports of its
persistence and simmering seemed less than apocalyptic, and while some
migrants continued to cling to properties they did not own under the law, and
some migrants and some nativists too continued to detonate bombs and carry out
knifings and shootings, Saeed and Nadia had the sense that overall, for most
people, in Britain at least, existence went on in tolerable safety.
Saeed and Nadia’s worker camp was bounded by a perimeter fence. Inside
this were large pavilions of a grayish fabric that looked like plastic, supported by
metal trusses in such a way that each reared up, and was airy within, and was
resistant to the wind and rain. The two of them occupied a small curtained-off
space in one of these dormitories, the curtains suspended from cables that ran
almost as high as Saeed could reach, above which was empty space, as though
the lower part of the pavilion was an open-topped maze, or the operating rooms
of a huge field hospital.
They ate modestly, meals composed of grains and vegetables and some dairy,
and when they were lucky, juiced fruit or a little meat. They were slightly
hungry, yes, but slept well because the labor was lengthy and rigorous. The first
dwellings that the workers of their camp had built were almost ready to be
occupied, and Saeed and Nadia were not too far down the list, and so by the end
of autumn they could look forward to moving into a home of their own. Their
blisters had given way to calluses, and the rain did not much bother them
anymore.
One night as Nadia slept on their cot beside Saeed she had a dream, a dream
of the girl from Mykonos, and she dreamt that she had returned to the house they
had first arrived at in London and had gone upstairs and passed back through the
door to the Greek isle, and when Nadia woke she was almost panting, and felt
her body alive, or alarmed, regardless changed, for the dream had seemed so
real, and after that she found herself thinking of Mykonos from time to time.
• • •
FOR HIS PART Saeed often had dreams of his father, whose death had been
reported to Saeed by a cousin who had recently managed to escape from their
city, and with whom Saeed had connected by social media, the cousin having
settled near Buenos Aires. This cousin told Saeed that Saeed’s father had passed
away from pneumonia, a lingering infection he had fought for months, initially
just a cold but then much worse, and in the absence of antibiotics he had
succumbed, but he had not been alone, his siblings were with him, and he had
been buried next to his wife, as he had wished.
Saeed did not know how to mourn, how to express his remorse, from so great
a distance. So he redoubled his work, and took on extra shifts even when he
barely had the strength, and the wait for Nadia and him to receive their dwelling
did not shorten, but it likewise did not increase, for other husbands and wives
and mothers and fathers and men and women were working extra shifts as well,
and Saeed’s additional efforts served to maintain his and Nadia’s ranking on the
list.
Nadia was deeply affected by the news of the old man’s passing, more even
than she had expected. She tried to speak to Saeed about his father, but she
stumbled over what to say, and on his side Saeed was quiet, unforthcoming. She
felt herself touched by guilt from time to time, although she was unsure what
precisely was making her guilty. All she knew was that when the feeling came it
was a relief for her to be away from Saeed, at work on their separate work sites,
a relief unless she thought about it, thought about being relieved not to be with
him, because when she thought about this the guilt was usually not too far
behind.
Saeed did not ask Nadia to pray with him for his father, and she did not offer,
but when he was gathering a circle of acquaintances to pray in the long evening
shadow cast by their dormitory, she said she would like to join the circle, to sit
with Saeed and the others, even if not engaged in supplication herself, and he
smiled and said there was no need. And she had no answer to this. But she
stayed anyway, next to Saeed on the naked earth that had been stripped of plants
by hundreds of thousands of footsteps and rutted by the tires of ponderously
heavy vehicles, feeling for the first time unwelcome. Or perhaps unengaged. Or
perhaps both.
• • •
FOR MANY, adjustment to this new world was difficult indeed, but for some it
was also unexpectedly pleasant.
On Prinsengracht in the center of Amsterdam an elderly man stepped out onto
the balcony of his little flat, one of the dozens into which what had been a pair of
centuries-old canal houses and former warehouses had been converted, these
flats looking out into a courtyard that was as lush with foliage as a tropical
jungle, wet with greenness, in this city of water, and moss grew on the wooden
edges of his balcony, and ferns also, and tendrils climbed up its sides, and there
he had two chairs, two chairs from ages ago when there were two people living
in his flat, though now there was one, his last lover having left him bitterly, and
he sat down on one of these chairs and delicately rolled himself a cigarette, his
fingers trembling, the paper crisp but with a hint of softness, from the damp, and
the tobacco smell reminded him as it always did of his departed father, who
would listen with him on his record player to audio recordings of science fiction
adventures, and would pack and puff on his pipe, as sea creatures attacked a
great submarine, the sounds of the wind and waves in the recording mixing with
the sounds of the rain on their window, and the elderly man who was then a boy
had thought, when I grow up I too will smoke, and here he was, a smoker for the
better part of a century, about to light a cigarette, when he saw emerging from
the common shed in the courtyard, where garden tools and the like were stored,
and from which a steady stream of foreigners now came and went, a wrinkled
man with a squint and a cane and a Panama hat, dressed as though for the
tropics.
The elderly man looked at this wrinkled man and did not speak. He merely lit
his cigarette and took a puff. The wrinkled man did not speak either: he walked
slowly around the courtyard, leaning into his cane, which made scraping noises
in the gravel of the footpath. Then the wrinkled man moved to reenter the shed,
but before he left he turned to the elderly man, who was looking at him with a
degree of disdain, and elegantly doffed his hat.
The elderly man was taken aback by this gesture, and sat still, as if transfixed,
and before he could think of how to respond the wrinkled man stepped forward
and was gone.
The next day the scene repeated itself. The elderly man was sitting on his
balcony. The wrinkled man returned. They gazed upon each other. And this time
when the wrinkled man doffed his hat, the elderly man raised a glass to him, a
glass of fortified wine, which he happened to be drinking, and he did so with a
serious but well-mannered nod of his head. Neither man smiled.
On the third day the elderly man asked the wrinkled man if he would care to
join him on his balcony, and though the elderly man could not speak Brazilian
Portuguese and the wrinkled man could not speak Dutch, they cobbled together a
conversation, a conversation with many long gaps, but these gaps were
eminently comfortable, almost unnoticed by the two men, as two ancient trees
would not notice a few minutes or hours that passed without a breeze.
On his next visit the wrinkled man invited the elderly man to come with him
through the black door that was inside the shed. The elderly man did so, walking
slowly, as the wrinkled man did as well, and at the other side of that door the
elderly man found himself being helped to his feet by the wrinkled man in the
hilly neighborhood of Santa Teresa, in Rio de Janeiro, on a day that was
noticeably younger and warmer than the day he had left in Amsterdam. There
the wrinkled man escorted him over tram tracks to the studio where he worked,
and showed him some of his paintings, and the elderly man was too caught up in
what was happening to be objective, but he thought these paintings were marked
by real talent. He asked if he might buy one, and was instead given his choice as
a gift.
A week later a war photographer who lived in a Prinsengracht flat that
overlooked the same courtyard was the first neighbor to note the presence of this
aged couple on the balcony opposite and below her. She was also, not long after,
and to her considerable surprise, a witness to their very first kiss, which she
captured, without expecting to, through the lens of her camera, and then deleted,
later that night, in a gesture of uncharacteristic sentimentality and respect.
• • •
SOMETIMES SOMEONE from the press would descend on Saeed and Nadia’s camp
or work site, but more often denizens would themselves document and post and
comment online upon what was going on. As usual, disasters attracted the most
outside interest, such as a nativist raid that disabled machinery or destroyed
dwelling units nearing completion or resulted in the severe beating of some
workers who had strayed too far from camp. Or alternatively the knifing of a
native foreman by a migrant or a fight among rival groups of migrants. But
mostly there was little to report, just the day-to-day goings-on of countless
people working and living and aging and falling in and out of love, as is the case
everywhere, and so not deemed worthy of headline billing or thought to be of
much interest to anyone but those directly involved.
No natives lived in the dormitories, for obvious reasons. But natives did labor
alongside migrants on the work sites, usually as supervisors or as operators of
heavy machinery, giant vehicles that resembled mechanized dinosaurs and
would lift vast amounts of earth or roll flat hot strips of paving or churn concrete
with the slow serenity of a masticating cow. Saeed had of course seen
construction equipment before, but some of what he saw now dwarfed in scale
anything he had previously seen, and in any case to work alongside a heaving
and snorting building engine is not the same as glimpsing one from a distance,
just as for an infantryman it is a markedly different experience to run alongside a
tank in battle than it is for a child to watch one on parade.
Saeed worked on a road crew. His foreman was a knowledgeable and
experienced native with a few short tufts of white hair ringing a mostly bald
scalp that was covered by his helmet unless he was wiping away his sweat at the
end of the day. This foreman was fair and strong and had a stark, afflicted
countenance. He did not make small talk but unlike many of the natives he ate
his lunch among the migrants who labored under him, and he seemed to like
Saeed, or if like was too strong a word, he seemed at least to value Saeed’s
dedication, and often he sat next to Saeed as he ate. Saeed also had the added
advantage of being among those workers who spoke English and so occupied a
status midway between the foreman and the others on the team.
The team was a very large one, there being a surfeit of able bodies and a
shortage of machinery, and the foreman was constantly devising methods of
using so many people efficiently. In some ways he felt he was caught between
the past and the future, the past because when he had first started his career the
balance of tasks had similarly tipped more towards manual labor, and the future
because when he looked around him now at the almost unimaginable scale of
what they were undertaking he felt they were remodeling the Earth itself.
Saeed admired his foreman, the foreman having that sort of quiet charisma
that young men often gravitate towards, part of which lay in the native man’s not
seeming the least interested in being admired. Also, for Saeed and for many
others on the team, their contact with the foreman was the closest and most
extended of their contacts with any native, and so they looked at him as though
he was the key to understanding their new home, its people and manners and
ways and habits, which in a sense he was, though of course their very presence
here meant that its people and manners and ways and habits were undergoing
considerable change.
One time, as evening approached and the work for the day wound down,
Saeed went up to his foreman and thanked him for all he was doing for the
migrants. The foreman did not say anything. In that instant Saeed was reminded
of those soldiers he had seen in the city of his birth, returning on leave from
battle, who, when you pestered them for stories about where they had been and
what they had done, looked at you as if you had no idea how much you were
asking.
• • •
SAEED WOKE BEFORE DAWN the next day, his body tight and stiff. He tried not to
move, out of consideration for Nadia, but opened his eyes and realized she was
awake. His first instinct was to pretend he was still sleeping—he was exhausted,
after all, and could have used more time undisturbed in bed—but the thought of
her lying there and feeling alone was not a pleasant one, and besides she might
have noticed the subterfuge. So he turned to her and asked, in a whisper, “Do
you want to go outside?”
She nodded without gazing at him, and each of them rose and sat with their
back to the other, on opposite sides of the cot, and fumbled in the dimness with
their feet for their work boots. Laces rasped as they were cinched and tied. They
could hear breathing and coughing and a child crying and the struggling sound
of quiet sex. The pavilion’s muted night-lighting was about the intensity of a
crescent moon: enough to allow sleep, but also enough to see shapes, though not
colors.
They made their way outside. The sky had begun to change, and was less
dark now than indigo, and there were others scattered around, other couples and
groups, but mostly solitary figures, unable to sleep, or at least unable to sleep
any longer. It was cool but not cold, and Nadia and Saeed stood side by side and
did not hold hands but felt the gentle pressure of their arms together, through
their sleeves.
“I’m so tired, this morning,” Nadia said.
“I know,” said Saeed. “So am I.”
Nadia wanted to say more to Saeed than that, but just then her throat felt raw,
almost painful, and what else she would have liked to say was unable to find a
way through to her tongue and her lips.
Saeed also had things on his mind. He knew he could have spoken to Nadia
now. He knew he should have spoken to Nadia now, for they had time and were
together and were not distracted. But he likewise could not bring himself to
speak.
And so they walked instead, Saeed taking the first step, and Nadia following,
and then both striding abreast each other, at a good clip, so that those who saw
them saw what looked like a brace of workers marching, and not a couple out on
a stroll. The camp was desolate at this hour, but there were birds out and about, a
great many birds, flying or perched upon the pavilions and the perimeter fence,
and Nadia and Saeed looked at these birds who had lost or would soon lose their
trees to construction, and Saeed sometimes called out to them with a faint,
sibilant, unpuckered whistle, like a balloon slowly deflating.
Nadia watched to see if any bird noticed his call, and did not on their walk
see even one.
• • •
NADIA WORKED on a mostly female crew that laid pipe, colossal spools and
pallets of it in different colors, orange and yellow and black and green. Through
these pipes soon would run the lifeblood and thoughts of the new city, all those
things that connect people without requiring them to move. Ahead of the pipelayers was a digging machine, like a wolf spider or praying mantis, with a wide
stance but a pair of dangerous-looking appendages at its front, coming together
in a crenellated scraper near where its mouth would have been. This digging
machine carved the trenches in the earth into which the pipe-layers would unfurl
and unstack and lower and connect the pipes.
The driver of the digging machine was a portly native man with a non-native
wife, a woman who looked native to Nadia but had apparently arrived from a
nearby country two decades ago, and who quite possibly had retained a trace of
her ancestral accent, but then again the natives had so many different accents
that it was impossible for Nadia to say. This woman worked nearby as a
supervisor in one of the food preparation units, and she would come to Nadia’s
work site on her lunch break when her husband was there, which was not
always, because he dug trenches for multiple pipe-laying crews, and then the
woman and her husband would unwrap sandwiches and unscrew thermoses and
eat and chat and laugh.
As time passed, Nadia and some of the other women on her crew began to
join them, for they were welcoming of company. The driver revealed himself to
be a chatterbox and jokester, and relished the attention, and his wife seemed to
relish it equally, though she spoke less, but she appeared to enjoy all these
women listening enrapt to her husband. Perhaps this made him grow in stature in
her own eyes. Nadia, who watched and smiled and usually said little in these
gatherings, thought the couple a bit like the queen and king of a domain
populated otherwise solely by women, a transient domain that would last only a
few short seasons, and she wondered if perhaps they thought the same and had
decided, nonetheless, to savor it.
• • •
IT WAS SAID that with every month there were more worker camps around
London, but even if this were true Saeed and Nadia noticed an almost daily
swelling of their own camp with new arrivals. Some came on foot, others in
buses or vans. On their days off workers were encouraged to help out around the
camp, and Saeed often volunteered to help process and settle the camp’s latest
additions.
Once he handled a small family, a mother, father, and daughter, three people
whose skin was so fair that it seemed they had never seen the sun. He was struck
by their eyelashes, which held the light improbably, and by their hands and
cheeks, in which networks of tiny veins could be seen. He wondered where they
came from, but he did not speak their language and they did not speak English,
and he did not want to pry.
The mother was tall and narrow-shouldered, as tall as the father, and the
daughter was a slightly smaller version of her mother, nearly equal to Saeed in
height, though he suspected she was still very young, likely just thirteen or
fourteen. They watched him with suspicion and in desperation, and Saeed was
careful to speak softly and move slowly, as one does when meeting a nervous
horse or puppy for the first time.
During the course of the afternoon he spent with them, Saeed only rarely
heard them speak to one another in what he thought of as their odd language.
Mostly they communicated by gesture, or with their eyes. Maybe, Saeed thought
initially, they feared he might be able to understand them. Later he suspected
something else. That they were ashamed, and that they did not yet know that
shame, for the displaced, was a common feeling, and that there was, therefore,
no particular shame in being ashamed.
He took them to their designated space in one of the new pavilions,
unoccupied and basic, with a cot, and some fabric shelving hanging from one of
the cables, and he left them there to settle in, left the three of them staring and
motionless. But when he returned an hour later to bring them to the mess tent for
lunch, and called out, and the mother pushed aside the flap that served as their
front door, and he glimpsed inside, what he glimpsed was a home, with the
shelves all full, and neat bundles of belongings on the ground, and a throw on
the cot, and also on the cot the daughter, her back unsupported but erect, her legs
crossed at the shins, so that her thighs rested on her feet, and in her lap a little
notebook or diary, in which she was writing furiously until the last moment,
until the mother called out her name, and which she then locked, with a key that
she wore on a string around her neck, and placed in one of the piles of
belongings that must have been hers, thrust the diary into the middle of the pile
so that it was hidden.
She fell in behind her parents, who nodded at Saeed in recognition, and he
turned and led them all from that place, a place that was already beginning to be
theirs, to another where going forward they could reliably find a meal.
• • •
THE NORTHERN SUMMER EVENINGS were endless. Saeed and Nadia often fell asleep
before it was fully dark, and before they fell asleep they often sat outside on the
ground with their backs to the dormitory, on their phones, wandering far and
wide but not together, even though they appeared to be together, and sometimes
he or she would look up and feel on their face the wind blowing through the
shattered fields all about them.
They put their lack of conversation down to exhaustion, for by the end of the
day they were usually so tired they could barely speak, and phones themselves
have the innate power of distancing one from one’s physical surroundings,
which accounted for part of it, but Saeed and Nadia no longer touched each other
when they lay in bed, not in that way, and not because their curtained-off space
in the pavilion seemed less than entirely private, or not only because of that, and
when they did speak at length, they, a pair once not used to arguing, tended to
argue, as though their nerves were so raw that extended encounters evoked a
sensation of pain.
Every time a couple moves they begin, if their attention is still drawn to one
another, to see each other differently, for personalities are not a single immutable
color, like white or blue, but rather illuminated screens, and the shades we reflect
depend much on what is around us. So it was with Saeed and Nadia, who found
themselves changed in each other’s eyes in this new place.
To Nadia, Saeed was if anything more handsome than he had been before, his
hard work and his gauntness suiting him, giving him a contemplative air, making
out of his boyishness a man of substance. She noticed other women looking at
him from time to time, and yet she herself felt strangely unmoved by his
handsomeness, as though he were a rock or a house, something she might admire
but without any real desire.
He had two or three white hairs in the stubble of his beard now, new arrivals
this summer, and he prayed more regularly, every morning and evening, and
perhaps on his lunch breaks too. When he spoke he spoke of paving and
positions on waiting lists and politics, but not of his parents, and not anymore of
travel, of all the places they might one day see together, or of the stars.
He was drawn to people from their country, both in the labor camp and
online. It seemed to Nadia that the farther they moved from the city of their
birth, through space and through time, the more he sought to strengthen his
connection to it, tying ropes to the air of an era that for her was unambiguously
gone.
To Saeed, Nadia looked much the same as she did when they first met, which
is to say strikingly fetching, if vastly more tired. But it was inexplicable that she
continued to wear her black robes, and it grated on him a bit, for she did not
pray, and she avoided speaking their language, and she avoided their people, and
sometimes he wanted to shout, well take it off then, and then he would wince
inwardly, since he believed he loved her, and his resentment, when it bubbled up
like this, made him angry with himself, with the man he seemed to be becoming,
a less than romantic man, which was not the sort of man he believed a man
should aspire to be.
Saeed wanted to feel for Nadia what he had always felt for Nadia, and the
potential loss of this feeling left him unmoored, adrift in a world where one
could go anywhere but still find nothing. He was certain that he cared for her and
wished good for her and wanted to protect her. She was the entirety of his close
family now, and he valued family above all, and when the warmth between them
seemed lacking his sorrow was immense, so immense that he was uncertain
whether all his losses had not combined into a core of loss, and in this core, this
center, the death of his mother and the death of his father and the possible death
of his ideal self who had loved his woman so well were like a single death that
only hard work and prayer might allow him to withstand.
Saeed made it a point to smile with Nadia, at least sometimes, and he hoped
she would feel something warm and caring when he smiled, but what she felt
was sorrow and the sense that they were better than this, and that together they
had to find a way out.
• • •
AND SO WHEN SHE SUGGESTED one day, out of the blue, under the drone-crossed
sky and in the invisible network of surveillance that radiated out from their
phones, recording and capturing and logging everything, that they abandon this
place, and give up their position on the housing list, and all they had built here,
and pass through a nearby door she had heard of, to the new city of Marin, on
the Pacific Ocean, close to San Francisco, he did not argue, or even resist, as she
thought he might, and instead he said yes, and both of them were filled with
hope, hope that they would be able to rekindle their relationship, to reconnect
with their relationship, as it had been not long ago, and to elude, through a
distance spanning a third of the globe, what it seemed in danger of becoming.
TEN
I
N MARIN, the higher up the hills one went, the fewer services there were, but the
better the scenery. Nadia and Saeed were relative latecomers to this new city,
and the lower slopes were all taken, and so they found a spot high up, with a
view across and through the Golden Gate Bridge of San Francisco and the bay,
when it was clear, and a view of scattered islands floating on a sea of clouds,
when the fog rolled in.
They assembled a shanty with a corrugated metal roof and discarded packing
crate sides. This, as their neighbors had explained, was earthquake friendly: it
might fall in a tremor, but it was unlikely to do its occupants too much harm
because of its relatively light weight. Wireless data signals were strong, and they
secured a solar panel and battery set with a universal outlet, which accepted
plugs from all around the world, and a rainwater collector fashioned from
synthetic fabric and a bucket, and dew collectors that fit inside plastic bottles
like the filaments of upside-down lightbulbs, and so life, while basic, was not
quite as rough, nor as cut off, as otherwise it might have been.
From their shanty the fog was a living thing: moving, thickening, slipping,
thinning out. It revealed the invisible, what was happening in the water and in
the air, for suddenly heat and cold and damp could not merely be felt on one’s
skin but be seen through their atmospheric effects. It seemed to Nadia and Saeed
that somehow they lived at once on the ocean and among the peaks.
For work Nadia hiked down, first through other unpiped and unwired districts
like their own, then through those where grid electricity had been installed, and
then through those where roads and running water had reached, and from there
she caught a ride on a bus or pickup truck to her place of employment, a food
cooperative in a hastily built commercial zone outside Sausalito.
Marin was overwhelmingly poor, all the more so in comparison to the
sparkling affluence of San Francisco. But there was nonetheless a spirit of at
least intermittent optimism that refused entirely to die in Marin, perhaps because
Marin was less violent than most of the places its residents had fled, or because
of the view, its position on the edge of a continent, overlooking the world’s
widest ocean, or because of the mix of its people, or its proximity to that realm
of giddy technology that stretched down the bay like a bent thumb, ever poised
to meet the curved finger of Marin in a slightly squashed gesture that all would
be okay.
• • •
ONE NIGHT Nadia brought back some weed a coworker had given her. She did not
know how Saeed would react, and this fact struck her as she hiked home. In the
city of their birth they had smoked joints together with pleasure, but a year had
passed since then, and he had changed since then, and perhaps she had changed
too, and the distance that had opened between them was such that things once
taken for granted could be taken for granted no longer.
Saeed was more melancholic than he had been before, understandably, and
also more quiet and devout. She sometimes felt that his praying was not neutral
towards her, in fact she suspected it carried a hint of reproach, though why she
felt this she could not say, for he had never told her to pray nor berated her for
not praying. But in his devotions was ever more devotion, and towards her it
seemed there was ever less.
She had considered rolling a joint outdoors and smoking the weed by herself,
without Saeed, concealed from Saeed, and it had surprised her to be considering
this, and made her wonder about the ways in which she was herself putting
barriers between her and him. She did not know if these gaps that had been
widening were mostly her doing or his, but she knew she still harbored
tenderness for him, and so she had brought the weed home, and it was only when
she sat beside him on the car seat they had bartered for and used now as a sofa,
that she realized, from her nervousness, that how in this moment he responded to
the weed was a matter of portentous significance to her.
Her leg and arm touched Saeed’s leg and arm, and he was warm through his
clothing, and he sat in a way that suggested exhaustion. But he also managed a
tired smile, which was encouraging, and when she opened her fist to reveal what
was inside, as she had once before done on her rooftop a brief lifetime ago, and
he saw the weed, he started to laugh, almost soundlessly, a gentle rumble, and he
said, his voice uncoiling like a slow, languid exhalation of marijuana-scented
smoke, “Fantastic.”
Saeed rolled the joint for them both, Nadia barely containing her jubilation,
and wanting to hug him but restraining herself. He lit it and they consumed it,
lungs burning, and the first thing that struck her was that this weed was much
stronger than the hash back home, and she was quite floored by its effects, and
also well on her way to becoming a little paranoid, and finding it difficult to
speak.
For a while they sat in silence, the temperature dropping outside. Saeed
fetched a blanket and they bundled it around themselves. And then, not looking
at each other, they started to laugh, and Nadia laughed until she cried.
• • •
IN MARIN THERE WERE almost no natives, these people having died out or been
exterminated long ago, and one would see them only occasionally, at impromptu
trading posts—or perhaps more often, but wrapped in clothes and guises and
behaviors indistinguishable from anyone else. At the trading posts they would
sell beautiful silver jewelry and soft leather garments and colorful textiles, and
the elders among them seemed not infrequently to be possessed of a limitless
patience that was matched by a limitless sorrow. Tales were told at these places
that people from all over now gathered to hear, for the tales of these natives felt
appropriate to this time of migration, and gave listeners much-needed
sustenance.
And yet it was not quite true to say there were almost no natives, nativeness
being a relative matter, and many others considered themselves native to this
country, by which they meant that they or their parents or their grandparents or
the grandparents of their grandparents had been born on the strip of land that
stretched from the mid-northern-Pacific to the mid-northern-Atlantic, that their
existence here did not owe anything to a physical migration that had occurred in
their lifetimes. It seemed to Saeed that the people who advocated this position
most strongly, who claimed the rights of nativeness most forcefully, tended to be
drawn from the ranks of those with light skin who looked most like the natives
of Britain—and as had been the case with many of the natives of Britain, many
of these people too seemed stunned by what was happening to their homeland,
what had already happened in so brief a period, and some seemed angry as well.
A third layer of nativeness was composed of those who others thought
directly descended, even in the tiniest fraction of their genes, from the human
beings who had been brought from Africa to this continent centuries ago as
slaves. While this layer of nativeness was not vast in proportion to the rest, it had
vast importance, for society had been shaped in reaction to it, and unspeakable
violence had occurred in relation to it, and yet it endured, fertile, a stratum of
soil that perhaps made possible all future transplanted soils, and to which Saeed
in particular was attracted, since at a place of worship where he had gone one
Friday the communal prayer was led by a man who came from this tradition and
spoke of this tradition, and Saeed had found, in the weeks he and Nadia had been
in Marin, this man’s words to be full of soul-soothing wisdom.
The preacher was a widower, and his wife had come from the same country
as Saeed, and so the preacher knew some of Saeed’s language, and his approach
to religion was partly familiar to Saeed, while at the same time partly novel, too.
The preacher did not solely preach. Mainly he worked to feed and shelter his
congregants, and teach them English. He ran a small but efficient organization
staffed with volunteers, young men and women, all Saeed’s color or darker,
which Saeed too had soon joined, and among these young men and women that
Saeed now labored alongside was one woman in particular, the preacher’s
daughter, with curly hair she wore tied up high on her head with a cloth, this one
woman the one woman in particular that Saeed avoided speaking to, because
whenever he looked at her he felt his breath tighten within him, and he thought
guiltily of Nadia, and he thought further that here, for him, lay something best
not explored at all.
• • •
NADIA PERCEIVED the presence of this woman not in the form of a distancing by
Saeed, as might have been expected, but rather as a warming up and reaching
out. Saeed seemed happier, and keen to smoke joints with Nadia at the end of the
day, or at least share a couple of puffs, for they had adjusted their consumption
in recognition of the local weed’s potency, and they began to speak of nothings
once again, of travel and the stars and the clouds and the music they heard all
around them from the other shanties. She felt bits of the old Saeed returning.
She wished, therefore, that she could be the old Nadia. But much as she
enjoyed their chats and the improved mood between them, they rarely touched,
and her desire to be touched by him, long subsided, did not flicker back into
flame. It seemed to Nadia that something had gone quiet inside her. She spoke to
him, but her words were muffled to her own ears. She lay beside Saeed, falling
asleep, but not craving his hands or his mouth on her body—stifled, as if Saeed
were becoming her brother, though never having had a brother she was unsure
what that term meant.
It was not that her sensuality, her sense of the erotic, had died. She found
herself aroused readily, by a beautiful man she passed as she walked down to
work, by memories of the musician who had been her first lover, by thoughts of
the girl from Mykonos. And sometimes when Saeed was out or asleep she
pleasured herself, and when she pleasured herself she thought increasingly of
that girl, the girl from Mykonos, and the strength of her response no longer
surprised her.
• • •
WHEN SAEED WAS a child he had first prayed out of curiosity. He had seen his
mother and father praying, and the act held a certain mystery for him. His
mother used to pray in her bedroom, perhaps once a day, unless it was a
particularly holy time, or there had been a death in the family, or an illness, in
which case she prayed more often. His father prayed mainly on Fridays, under
normal circumstances, and only sporadically during the week. Saeed would see
them preparing to pray, and see them praying, and see their faces after they had
prayed, usually smiling, as though relieved, or released, or comforted, and he
would wonder what happened when one prayed, and he was curious to
experience it for himself, and so he asked to learn before his parents had yet
thought of teaching him, and his mother provided the requisite instruction one
particularly hot summer, and that is how, for him, it began. Until the end of his
days, prayer sometimes reminded Saeed of his mother, and his parents’ bedroom
with its slight smell of perfume, and the ceiling fan churning in the heat.
As he was entering his teens, Saeed’s father asked Saeed if he would like to
accompany him to the weekly communal prayer. Saeed said yes, and thereafter
every Friday, without fail, Saeed’s father would drive home and collect his son
and Saeed would pray with his father and the men, and prayer for him became
about being a man, being one of the men, a ritual that connected him to
adulthood and to the notion of being a particular sort of man, a gentleman, a
gentle man, a man who stood for community and faith and kindness and
decency, a man, in other words, like his father. Young men pray for different
things, of course, but some young men pray to honor the goodness of the men
who raised them, and Saeed was very much a young man of this mold.
By the time he entered university, Saeed’s parents prayed more often than
they had when he was younger, maybe because they had lost a great many loved
ones by that age, or maybe because the transient natures of their own lives were
gradually becoming less hidden from them, or maybe because they worried for
their son in a country that seemed to worship money above all, no matter how
much other forms of worship were given lip service, or maybe simply because
their personal relationships with prayer had deepened and become more
meaningful over the years. Saeed too prayed more often in this period, at the
very least once a day, and he valued the discipline of it, the fact that it was a
code, a promise he had made, and that he stood by.
Now, though, in Marin, Saeed prayed even more, several times a day, and he
prayed fundamentally as a gesture of love for what had gone and would go and
could be loved in no other way. When he prayed he touched his parents, who
could not otherwise be touched, and he touched a feeling that we are all children
who lose our parents, all of us, every man and woman and boy and girl, and we
too will all be lost by those who come after us and love us, and this loss unites
humanity, unites every human being, the temporary nature of our being-ness,
and our shared sorrow, the heartache we each carry and yet too often refuse to
acknowledge in one another, and out of this Saeed felt it might be possible, in
the face of death, to believe in humanity’s potential for building a better world,
and so he prayed as a lament, as a consolation, and as a hope, but he felt that he
could not express this to Nadia, that he did not know how to express this to
Nadia, this mystery that prayer linked him to, and it was so important to express
it, and somehow he was able to express it to the preacher’s daughter, the first
time they had a proper conversation, at a small ceremony he happened upon after
work, which turned out to be a remembrance for her mother, who had been from
Saeed’s country, and was prayed for communally on each anniversary of her
death, and her daughter, who was also the preacher’s daughter, said to Saeed,
who was standing near her, so tell me about my mother’s country, and when
Saeed spoke he did not mean to but he spoke of his own mother, and he spoke
for a long time, and the preacher’s daughter spoke for a long time, and when
they finished speaking it was already late at night.
• • •
SAEED AND NADIA WERE LOYAL, and whatever name they gave their bond they
each in their own way believed it required them to protect the other, and so
neither talked much of drifting apart, not wanting to inflict a fear of
abandonment, while also themselves quietly feeling that fear, the fear of the
severing of their tie, the end of the world they had built together, a world of
shared experiences in which no one else would share, and a shared intimate
language that was unique to them, and a sense that what they might break was
special and likely irreplaceable. But while fear was part of what kept them
together for those first few months in Marin, more powerful than fear was the
desire that each see the other find firmer footing before they let go, and thus in
the end their relationship did in some senses come to resemble that of siblings, in
that friendship was its strongest element, and unlike many passions, theirs
managed to cool slowly, without curdling into its reverse, anger, except
intermittently. Of this, in later years, both were glad, and both would also
wonder if this meant that they had made a mistake, that if they had but waited
and watched their relationship would have flowered again, and so their
memories took on potential, which is of course how our greatest nostalgias are
born.
Jealousy did rear itself in their shanty from time to time, and the couple that
was uncoupling did argue, but mostly they granted each other more space, a
process that had been ongoing for quite a while, and if there was sorrow and
alarm in this, there was relief too, and the relief was stronger.
There was also closeness, for the end of a couple is like a death, and the
notion of death, of temporariness, can remind us of the value of things, which it
did for Saeed and Nadia, and so even though they spoke less and did less
together, they saw each other more, although not more often.
One night one of the tiny drones that kept a watch on their district, part of a
swarm, and not larger than a hummingbird, crashed into the transparent plastic
flap that served as both door and window of their shanty, and Saeed gathered its
motionless iridescent body and showed it to Nadia, and she smiled and said they
ought to give it a burial, and they dug a small hole right there, in the hilly soil
where it had fallen, using a spade, and then covered this grave again, pressed it
flat, and Nadia asked if Saeed was planning on offering a prayer for the departed
automaton, and he laughed and said maybe he would.
• • •
SOMETIMES THEY LIKED to sit outside their shanty in the open air, where they
could hear all the sounds of the new settlement, sounds like a festival, music and
voices and a motorcycle and the wind, and they wondered what Marin had been
like before. People said it had been beautiful, but in a different way, and empty.
The winter that year was a season that had splashes of autumn and spring
mixed up in it, even an occasional day of summer. Once as they sat it was so
warm that they did not need sweaters, and they watched as the sunlight poured
down in angled bursts through gaps in the bright, roiling clouds, and lit up bits of
San Francisco and Oakland and the otherwise dark waters of the bay.
“What’s that?” Nadia asked Saeed, pointing to a flat and geometric shape.
“They call it Treasure Island,” Saeed said.
She smiled. “What an interesting name.”
“Yes.”
“The one behind it should be called Treasure Island. It’s more mysterious.”
Saeed nodded. “And that bridge, Treasure Bridge.”
Someone was cooking over an open fire nearby, beyond the next ridge of
shanties. They could see a thin trail of smoke and smell something. Not meat.
Sweet potatoes maybe. Or maybe plantains.
Saeed hesitated, then took Nadia’s hand, his palm covering her knuckles. She
curved her fingers, furling the tips of his around hers. She thought she felt his
pulse. They sat like that for a long while.
“I’m hungry,” she said.
“So am I.”
She almost kissed him on his prickly cheek. “Well, somewhere down there is
everything in the world anyone could want to eat.”
• • •
NOT FAR TO THE SOUTH, in the town of Palo Alto, lived an old woman who had
lived in the same house her entire life. Her parents had brought her to this house
when she was born, and her mother had passed on there when she was a
teenager, and her father when she was in her twenties, and her husband had
joined her there, and her two children had grown up in this house, and she had
lived alone with them when she divorced, and later with her second husband,
their stepfather, and her children had moved off to college and not returned, and
her second husband had died two years ago, and throughout this time she had
never moved, traveled, yes, but never moved, and yet it seemed the world had
moved, and she barely recognized the town that existed outside her property.
The old woman had become a rich woman on paper, the house now worth a
fortune, and her children were always pestering her to sell it, saying she didn’t
need all that space. But she told them to be patient, it would be theirs when she
died, which wouldn’t be long now, and she said this kindly, to sharpen the bite
of it, and to remind them how much they were motivated by money, money they
spent without having, which she had never done, always saving for a rainy day,
even if only a little.
One of her granddaughters went to the great university nearby, a university
that had gone from being a local secret to among the world’s most famous in the
space of the old woman’s lifetime. This granddaughter came to see her, often as
much as once a week. She was the only one of the old woman’s descendants
who did this, and the old woman adored her, and also sometimes felt baffled by
her: looking at her granddaughter she thought she saw what she would have
looked like had she been born in China, for the granddaughter had features of the
old woman, and yet looked to the old woman, overall, more or less, but mostly
more, Chinese.
There was a rise that led up to the old woman’s street, and when she was a
little girl the old woman used to push her bike up and then get on and zoom back
down without pedaling, bikes being heavy in those days and hard to take uphill,
especially when you were small, as she was then, and your bike too big, as hers
had been. She had liked to see how far she could glide without stopping, flashing
through the intersections, ready to brake, but not overly ready, because there had
been a lot less traffic, at least as far as she could remember.
She had always had carp in a mossy pond in the back of her house, carp that
her granddaughter called goldfish, and she had known the names of almost
everyone on her street, and most had been there a long time, they were old
California, from families that were California families, but over the years they
had changed more and more rapidly, and now she knew none of them, and saw
no reason to make the effort, for people bought and sold houses the way they
bought and sold stocks, and every year someone was moving out and someone
was moving in, and now all these doors from who knows where were opening,
and all sorts of strange people were around, people who looked more at home
than she was, even the homeless ones who spoke no English, more at home
maybe because they were younger, and when she went out it seemed to her that
she too had migrated, that everyone migrates, even if we stay in the same houses
our whole lives, because we can’t help it.
We are all migrants through time.
ELEVEN
ALL OVER THE WORLD people were slipping away from where they had been,
from once fertile plains cracking with dryness, from seaside villages gasping
beneath tidal surges, from overcrowded cities and murderous battlefields, and
slipping away from other people too, people they had in some cases loved, as
Nadia was slipping away from Saeed, and Saeed from Nadia.
It was Nadia who first brought up the topic of her moving out of the shanty,
said in passing as she sipped on a joint, taking the slenderest of puffs, held in her
lungs even as the idea of what she had said scented the air. Saeed did not say
anything in response, he merely took a hit himself, contained it tightly, exhaling
later into her exhale. In the morning when she woke he was looking at her, and
he stroked the hair from her face, as he had not done for months, and he said if
anyone should leave the home they had built it was him. But as he said this he
felt he was acting, or if not acting then so confused as to be incapable of gauging
his own sincerity. He did think that he ought to be the one to go, that he had
reparations to make for becoming close to the preacher’s daughter. So it was not
his words that felt to him like an act, but rather his stroking of Nadia’s hair,
which, it seemed to him in that moment, he might never have permission to
stroke again. Nadia too felt both comforted and discomforted by this physical
intimacy, and she said that no, she wanted to be the one to leave if one of them
left, and she likewise detected an untruth in her words, for she knew the matter
was one not of if, but of when, and that when would be soon.
A spoilage had begun to manifest itself in their relationship, and each
recognized it would be better to part now, ere worse came, but days passed
before they discussed it again, and as they discussed it Nadia was already
packing her things into a backpack and a satchel, and so their discussion of her
departure was not, as it pretended to be, a discussion of her departure, but a
navigation, through words that said otherwise, of their fear of what would come
next, and when Saeed insisted he would carry her bags for her, she insisted he
not do so, and they did not embrace or kiss then, they stood facing each other at
the threshold of the shanty that had been theirs, and they did not shake hands
either, they looked each at the other, for a long, long time, any gesture seeming
inadequate, and in silence Nadia turned and walked away into the misty drizzle,
and her raw face was wet and alive.
• • •
AT THE FOOD COOPERATIVE where Nadia worked there were rooms available,
storerooms upstairs, in the back. These rooms had cots, and workers in good
standing at the cooperative could use them, stay there, seemingly indefinitely,
provided one’s colleagues thought the need to stay was valid, and one put in
enough extra hours to cover the occupancy, and while this practice was likely in
violation of some code or other, regulations were not much in force anymore,
even here near Sausalito.
Nadia knew people stayed at the cooperative, but she did not know how the
policy worked, and no one had told her. For although she was a woman, and the
cooperative was run and staffed predominantly by women, her black robe was
thought by many to be off-putting, or self-segregating, or in any case vaguely
menacing, and so few of her colleagues had really reached out to her until the
day that a pale-skinned tattooed man had come in while she was working the till
and had placed a pistol on the counter and said to her, “So what the fuck do you
think of that?”
Nadia did not know what to say and so she said nothing, not challenging his
gaze but not looking away either. Her eyes focused on a spot around his chin,
and they stood like this, in silence, for a moment, and the man repeated himself,
a bit less steadily the second time, and then, without robbing the cooperative, or
shooting Nadia, he left, taking his gun and cursing and kicking over a bushel of
lumpy apples as he went.
Whether it was because they were impressed by her mettle in the face of
danger or because they recalibrated their sense of who was threat and who was
threatened or because they now simply had something to talk about, several
people on her shifts began chatting with her a lot more after that. She felt she
was beginning to belong, and when one told her about the option of living at the
cooperative, and that she could avail herself of it if her family was oppressing
her, or, another added quickly, even if she just felt like a change, the possibility
struck Nadia with a shock of recognition, as though a door was opening up, a
door in this case shaped like a room.
It was into this room that Nadia moved when she separated from Saeed. The
room smelled of potatoes and thyme and mint and the cot smelled a little of
people, even though it was reasonably clean, and there was no record player, and
no scope to decorate either, the room continuing to be used as a storeroom. But
Nadia was nonetheless reminded of her apartment in the city of her birth, which
she had loved, reminded of what it was like to live there alone, and while the
first night she slept not at all, and the second only fitfully, as the days passed she
slept better and better, and this room came to feel to her like home.
The locality around Marin seemed to be rousing itself from a profound and
collective low in those days. It has been said that depression is a failure to
imagine a plausible desirable future for oneself, and, not just in Marin, but in the
whole region, in the Bay Area, and in many other places too, places both near
and far, the apocalypse appeared to have arrived and yet it was not apocalyptic,
which is to say that while the changes were jarring they were not the end, and
life went on, and people found things to do and ways to be and people to be
with, and plausible desirable futures began to emerge, unimaginable previously,
but not unimaginable now, and the result was something not unlike relief.
Indeed there was a great creative flowering in the region, especially in music.
Some were calling this a new jazz age, and one could walk around Marin and see
all kinds of ensembles, humans with humans, humans with electronics, dark skin
with light skin with gleaming metal with matte plastic, computerized music and
unamplified music and even people who wore masks or hid themselves from
view. Different types of music gathered different tribes of people, tribes that had
not existed before, as is always the case, and at one such gathering, Nadia saw
the head cook from the cooperative, a handsome woman with strong arms, and
this woman saw Nadia seeing her and nodded in recognition. Later they wound
up standing beside one another and talking, not much, and just in between the
songs, but when the set ended they did not leave, they continued to listen and
talk during the set that followed.
The cook had eyes that seemed an almost inhuman blue, or rather a blue that
Nadia had not previously thought of as human, so pale as to suggest, if you
looked at them when the cook was looking away, that these eyes might be blind.
But when they looked at you there was no doubt that they saw, for this woman
gazed so powerfully, she was such a watcher, that her watching hit you like a
physical force, and Nadia felt a thrill being seen by her, and seeing her in turn.
The cook was, of course, an expert in food, and over the coming weeks and
months she introduced Nadia to all sorts of old cuisines, and to new cuisines that
were being born, for many of the world’s foods were coming together and being
reformed in Marin, and the place was a taster’s paradise, and the rationing that
was under way meant you were always a little hungry, and therefore primed to
savor what you got, and Nadia had never before delighted in tasting as she did in
the company of the cook, who reminded her a bit of a cowboy, and who made
love, when they made love, with a steady hand and a sure eye and a mouth that
did little but did it so very well.
• • •
SAEED AND THE PREACHER’S DAUGHTER likewise drew close, and while there was
some resistance by others to this, Saeed’s ancestors not having undergone the
experience of slavery and its aftermath on this continent, the effects of the
preacher’s particular brand of religion diminished this resistance, and with time
camaraderie did too, the work Saeed did alongside his fellow volunteers, and
then there was the fact that the preacher had married a woman from Saeed’s
country, and also that the preacher’s daughter was born of a woman from
Saeed’s country, and so the pair’s closeness, even if it prompted unease in some
quarters, was tolerated, and for the pair themselves their closeness carried both a
spark of the exotic and the comfort of familiarity, as many couplings do, when
they first begin.
Saeed would seek her out in the mornings, when he arrived for work, and
they would talk and smile sidelong, and she might touch his elbow, and they
would sit together at the communal lunch, and in the evenings when their work
was done for the day they would walk through Marin, hike up and down the
paths and the streets that were forming, and once they walked past Saeed’s
shanty, and he told her it was his, and the next time they walked by she asked to
see the inside of it, and they went in, and they shut the plastic flap behind them.
The preacher’s daughter found in Saeed an attitude to faith that intrigued her,
and she found the expansiveness of his gaze upon the universe, the way he spoke
of the stars and of the people of the world, very sexy, and his touch as well, and
she liked the cut of his face, how it reminded her of her mother and hence her
childhood. And Saeed found her remarkably easy to talk to, not just because she
listened well or spoke well, which she did, but because she prompted him to
want to listen and speak, and he had from the outset found her so attractive that
she was almost difficult to look at, and also, though he did not say this to her, or
even care to think it, there were aspects of her that were much like Nadia.
The preacher’s daughter was among the local campaign leaders of the
plebiscite movement, which sought a ballot on the question of the creation of a
regional assembly for the Bay Area, with members elected on the principle of
one person one vote, regardless of where one came from. How this assembly
would coexist with other preexisting bodies of government was as yet
undecided. It might at first have only a moral authority, but that authority could
be substantial, for unlike those other entities for which some humans were not
human enough to exercise suffrage, this new assembly would speak from the
will of all the people, and in the face of that will, it was hoped, greater justice
might be less easily denied.
One day she showed Saeed a little device that looked to him like a thimble.
She was so happy, and he asked her why, and she said that this could be the key
to the plebiscite, that it made it possible to tell one person from another and
ensure they could vote only once, and it was being manufactured in vast
numbers, at a cost so small as to be almost nothing, and he held it on his palm
and discovered to his surprise that it was no heavier than a feather.
• • •
WHEN NADIA WALKED AWAY from their shanty, she and Saeed did not
communicate for the rest of the day, nor on the day that followed. It was the
longest cessation of contact between them since they had left the city of their
birth. On the evening of their second day apart Saeed called her to ask how she
was doing, to inquire if she was safe, and also to hear her voice, and the voice he
heard was familiar and strange, and as they spoke he wanted to see her, but he
withstood this, and they hung up without arranging a meeting. She called him
the following evening, again a brief call, and after that they messaged or spoke
to one another on most days, and while their first weekend apart passed
separately, on the second weekend they agreed to meet for a walk by the ocean,
and they walked to the sound of the wind and the crashing waves and in the hiss
of the spray.
They met again for a walk the weekend after that, and again the weekend
after that, and there was a sadness to these meetings, for they missed each other,
and they were lonely and somewhat adrift in this new place. Sometimes after
they met Nadia would feel part of herself torn inside, and sometime Saeed would
feel this, and both teetered on the cusp of making some physical gesture that
would bind them each to the other again, but both in the end managed to resist.
The ritual of their weekly walk was interrupted, as such connections are, by
the strengthening of other pulls on their time, the pull of the cook on Nadia, of
the preacher’s daughter on Saeed, and of new acquaintances. While the first
shared weekend walk that they skipped was noticed sharply by them both, the
second was not so much, and the third almost not at all, and soon they were
meeting only once a month or so, and several days would pass in between a
message or a call.
They lingered in this state of tangential connection as winter gave way to
spring—though seasons in Marin seemed sometimes to last only for a small
portion of a day, to change in the time that one took off one’s jacket or put on
one’s sweater—and they lingered still in this state as a warm spring gave way to
a cool summer. Neither much enjoyed catching unexpected glimpses of their
former lover’s new existence online, and so they distanced themselves from each
other on social networks, and while they wished to look out for each other, and
to keep tabs on each other, staying in touch took a toll on them, serving as an
unsettling reminder of a life not lived, and also they grew less worried each for
the other, less worried that the other would need them to be happy, and
eventually a month went by without any contact, and then a year, and then a
lifetime.
• • •
OUTSIDE MARRAKESH, in the hills, overlooking the palatial home of a man who
might once have been called a prince and a woman who might once have been
called a foreigner, there was a maid in an emptying village who could not speak
and, perhaps for this reason, could not imagine leaving. She worked in the great
house below, a house that had fewer servants now than it did in the year before,
and fewer then than in the year before that, its retainers having gradually fled, or
moved, but not the maid, who rode to work each morning on a bus, and who
survived by virtue of her salary.
The maid was not old, but her husband and daughter were gone, her husband
not long after their marriage, to Europe, from which he had not returned, and
from which he had eventually stopped sending money. The maid’s mother had
said it was because she could not speak and because she had given him a taste of
the pleasures of the flesh, unknown to him before their marriage, and so she had
armed him as a man and been disarmed by nature as a woman. But her mother
had been hard, and the maid had not thought the trade a bad one, for her husband
had given her a daughter, and this daughter had given her companionship on her
journey through life, and though her daughter too had passed through the doors,
she returned to visit, and each time she returned she told the maid to come with
her, and the maid said no, for she had a sense of the fragility of things, and she
felt she was a small plant in a small patch of soil held between the rocks of a dry
and windy place, and she was not wanted by the world, and here she was at least
known, and she was tolerated, and that was a blessing.
The maid was of an age at which men had stopped seeing her. She had had
the body of a woman when she was still a girl, when she was married off, so
young, and her body had ripened further after she birthed and nursed her child,
and men had once paused to look at her, not at her face, but at her figure, and she
had often been alarmed by those looks, in part because of the danger in them,
and in part because she knew how they changed when she was revealed to be
mute, and so the end of being seen was mostly a relief. Mostly, almost entirely,
yet not entirely, for life had given the maid no space for the luxuries of vanity,
but even so, she was human.
The maid did not know her age, but she knew she was younger than the
mistress of the house where she worked, whose hair was still jet and whose
posture was still erect and whose dresses were still cut with the intention to
arouse. The mistress seemed not to have aged at all in the many years the maid
had worked for her. From a distance she might be mistaken for a very young
woman, while the maid seemed to have aged doubly, perhaps for them both, as if
her occupation had been to age, to exchange the magic of months for bank notes
and food.
In the summer that Saeed and Nadia were parting into separate lives, the
maid’s daughter came to see the maid in that village where almost everyone had
gone and they drank coffee under the evening sky and looked out at the
reddening dust rising in the south and daughter asked mother again to come with
her.
The maid looked at her daughter, who looked to her as though she had
captured the best of her, and of her husband too, for she could see him in her,
and of her mother, whose voice came from her daughter’s mouth, strong and
low, but not her words, for her daughter’s words were utterly unlike her
mother’s had been, they were quick and nimble and new. The maid placed her
hand on her daughter’s hand and brought it to her lips and kissed it, the skin of
her lips clinging for an instant to the skin of her child, clinging even as she
lowered her daughter’s hand, the shape of lips being mutable in this way, and the
maid smiled and shook her head.
One day she might go, she thought.
But not today.
TWELVE
HALF A CENTURY LATER Nadia returned for the first time to the city of her birth,
where the fires she had witnessed in her youth had burned themselves out
long ago, the lives of cities being far more persistent and more gently cyclical
than those of people, and the city she found herself in was not a heaven but it
was not a hell, and it was familiar but also unfamiliar, and as she wandered
about slowly, exploring, she was informed of the proximity of Saeed, and after
standing motionless for a considerable moment she communicated with him, and
they agreed to meet.
They met at a café near her old building, which still stood, though most of the
others close by had changed, and they sat beside one another on two adjacent
sides of a small square table, under the sky, and they looked at each other,
sympathetic looks, for time had done what time does, but looks of particular
recognition, and they watched the young people of this city pass, young people
who had no idea how bad things once were, except what they studied in history,
which was perhaps as it should be, and they sipped their coffees, and they spoke.
Their conversation navigated two lives, with vital details highlighted and
excluded, and it was also a dance, for they were former lovers, and they had not
wounded each other so deeply as to have lost their ability to find a rhythm
together, and they grew younger and more playful as the coffee in their cups
diminished, and Nadia said imagine how different life would be if I had agreed
to marry you, and Saeed said imagine how different it would be if I had agreed
to have sex with you, and Nadia said we were having sex, and Saeed considered
and smiled and said yes I suppose we were.
Above them bright satellites transited in the darkening sky and the last hawks
were returning to the rest of their nests and around them passersby did not pause
to look at this old woman in her black robe or this old man with his stubble.
They finished their coffees. Nadia asked if Saeed had been to the deserts of
Chile and seen the stars and was it all he had imagined it would be. He nodded
and said if she had an evening free he would take her, it was a sight worth seeing
in this life, and she shut her eyes and said she would like that very much, and
they rose and embraced and parted and did not know, then, if that evening would
ever come.
